 “The natural system”—A middle course—Neuropterous
      insects—White ants and their ways—Kings and queens—A royal
      diet—Secondary majesties—Soldiers and workers—Ant
      invaders—Methods of warfare.

IF there is any plan in this little book it will, no doubt, appear in
time to its readers, but I myself am only quite clear as to this, that,
not being of a scientific nature, it will not include a definition of an
insect. Why should it? Everybody knows what he thinks an insect is, and
those who may be willing to have their ideas on such a fundamental
subject disturbed will rightly consult some work of greater authority
than this can pretend to. So instead of worrying myself, and others,
about what insects really are, or what are not really insects, as, for
instance, spiders, centipedes, scorpions, and the like, all which I
propose to include in my tale—should they happen to present themselves—I
shall confine myself to saying something about what some insects do, and
I shall let one suggest and lead to the discussion of another, quite at
haphazard, and without any attempt at system or classification whatever.
This, in fact, is my own idea as to what is “the natural system,” and
the only trouble about it is knowing where to begin, because, as there
are some 300,000 known insects,[1] and any one of them will do as well
to start from as any other, there is a great _embarras de richesses_. In
such cases the usual thing to do is to take either the head or the tail
of the series—to commence with the _Hymenoptera_, which include the
highest and most intelligent forms, such as the ants and bees, or else
with the _Collembola_ or _Thysanura_, which are understood to contain
the lowest. I shall not adopt either of these methods. The _Neuroptera_,
as far as I can make out (and if they don’t it doesn’t matter), stand
somewhere about the middle, and with them accordingly—as being between
the two extremes—I decide to break ground. Having done so, as I said
before, I may go anywhere—absolute freedom will be mine. Like Plato, I
can follow the argument whithersoever it leads; inspired with which
reflection I hasten to begin it.

Though the order of neuropterous—which, by the way, means
nerve-winged—insects does not contain any ants, yet the so-called white
ants or termites—which are very like ants in their ways, and almost, or
quite, as interesting to talk about—are included in it. They are
commonest in tropical or, at any rate, very hot countries, such as
Africa, Australia, and South America, and here the conical, or
dome-shaped structures, made of red earth, which they erect above the
surface of the ground, and which contain the greater part of the nest,
are of such dimensions as to take a very prominent part in the features
of the landscape. Often they are covered with vegetation, including
bushes, or even small trees, on which, in Africa, antelopes are
accustomed to browse. In Australia there is no reason, that I can see,
why kangaroos should not, at least upon the grass which must often
clothe them, and which is their staple of food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    These great mounds are made by the white ants, and contain
      their nests; but large and strong as they are, the ant-eater
      breaks them down and devours the ants. A queen white ant is
      shown at the right-hand corner with the extraordinary
      development in which the eggs are carried.

These great mounds are pierced in every direction with innumerable
galleries, leading to and from the various cells and chambers in which
the domestic economy of the white ants is principally performed, one of
which, known as the royal cell, contains the king and queen, and is
situated beneath all the others. Not all white ants, however—for there
are several species—are governed or presided over in this way. Grassi,
who studied them in Sicily,[2] declares that the whole of the Termitidæ,
whether belonging to Southern Europe or the still hotter countries from
which they have, no doubt, been unknowingly imported, fall into two
primary types. In the first of these the colony is presided over by a
king and queen, representing the fully developed male and female forms,
which have once, unlike the workers and soldiers—for, like ants, these
insects are divided into castes—possessed fully developed wings, which
they have subsequently got rid of in the same way that the queen ant
does hers. In the second type the colony possesses several kings and
queens, but these, though they marry and produce offspring, are not
perfect males and females, and never possess wings. They are, in fact,
produced artificially by the working termites, just as the hive-bees are
able to make themselves a new queen—should they require one—by feeding
an ordinary worker with royal jelly, and by a method somewhat similar
though not precisely the same, the royal substitutes being fed, not on
any extraneous substance, but on a salivary fluid secreted by the
workers themselves—saliva, in fact. The colony, however, is, in this
case, not founded by the royalties thus bred up, but by a portion of a
pre-existent colony which, migrating from the parent nest, takes this
method of augmenting its numbers.[3]

In the termite nest, as amongst ants, all members work for the good of
all. The soldiers, which are furnished with large heads and long
scythe-like jaws, take upon themselves the duties of attack and defence,
though in some species they only do so when the enemy is of a formidable
nature, leaving unimportant foes to their less specialised companions.
These are equal to such inglorious tasks, but when the colony is invaded
by hostile members of their own race, or by some fierce ant enemy, they
retreat into the inner recesses, leaving the danger and honour to
others. Such an enemy is _Cremastogaster scutellaris_—or call him
Cremas—who, though never invaded by the white ants, enters their nest—or
termitary, to use the learned word—intent upon massacre. Under such
circumstances “the soldiers place themselves, with gaping mandibles,
waiting for any ant that may come within reach. They then snap their
jaws rapidly, shearing off antennæ and legs, tearing the abdomen, or
even cutting the ants in two. The soldiers’ mandibles are seen to act
like extremely sharp shears.”[3] This should be somewhat discouraging
for the ants, and, indeed, they seem rather shy of the soldiers,
avoiding their heads, and “only daring occasionally to attempt to lop
off their mandibles.” Their more considered method, which they adopt
whenever practicable, is to approach them from behind, and bite their
abdomens, the soldiers, on their part, endeavouring to protect this
vulnerable portion—and it is a fairly large one—of their anatomy by
creeping backwards under pieces of wood or stones, from which the head,
with its murderous jaws, is alone allowed to project.

In these encounters the advantage does not seem to lie so decidedly with
the ants as to explain their conduct in making the invasion, since
peace, according to Professor Grassi’s observations, is usually
concluded “after about an hour’s conflict, with a certain number of
killed and wounded on both sides.”[3] As a result, however, it would
appear that the ants often remain in possession of a portion of the
nest, whilst the original occupants have to be contented with what
remains. If this, therefore, is their object, the invaders have carried
the day, but if, as seems likely under natural conditions, they should
prefer to return to their own home, they can hardly be said to have done
so. Information seems wanting on these points.

As with ants, war is also waged between the various species of
Termitidæ. _Termes lucifuga_, for instance—for where there is no English
name there is nothing for it but to speak Latin—is, though much smaller,
a terrible enemy of _Calotermes_. The soldiers of the latter can,
indeed, without much difficulty, cut their own in two, but their greater
activity is often more than a match for the superior strength of their
opponents. The workers are more easily disposed of, but with these the
soldiers of _Calotermes_ do not often concern themselves. They are left
to the nymphs[4] and larvæ, the equivalents, with the latter species, of
a true worker caste which has not yet been developed amongst them, as it
has with others of the family. When Professor Grassi placed a worker of
Termes in one of his Calotermite tube-nests[5] it was at once placed
_hors de combat_ by a nymph (somewhat a shrewish one) of the latter,
which, rushing upon it, cut off a portion of its mouth. Other nymphs, as
well as several large larvæ, then hurried up and proceeded to further
the good work by severing the unfortunate creature’s legs, and tearing
open its abdomen. In all this the soldiers took no part until one,
towards the end of the struggle, advanced and added his single bite to
those which had been so plentifully bestowed. Similar observations were
made upon various other occasions, from which it appears plain that, as
before remarked, the soldiers of this—very probably of all the
termites—are accustomed, purposely, to reserve their strength for foemen
worthy of their steel.

It will be seen from the above account that termites differ from true
ants in one very important particular, namely, that they are as active
and free-moving in the larval and pupal states as in the mature, or
imago, one. “The termite society,” indeed, “consists, for the most part,
of wingless sexually immature individuals, children potentially of both
sexes, which do not grow up.”[6] Out of the majority of these the worker
caste, when it exists, is formed, whilst a much lesser number develop
into the large-headed, long-jawed soldiers. Both of these castes,
apparently, are produced independently of sex, that is to say, they are
potentially either males or females, and not composed exclusively, as is
the case with ants and bees, of undeveloped females. Only the genuine
king and queen of the termitary would seem to have attained the true
imago state; such substitute royal forms as the workers, by feeding the
larvæ with saliva, are able to produce, retaining larval
characteristics, though sexually mature—a phenomenon scientifically
known as _neoteinia_. As with the bees, these potential future royalties
are bred up by the working termites to meet possible future emergencies.
They are never allowed to leave the nest, and, should any accident
befall the reigning king and queen, a pair of them are chosen to rule
and produce offspring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               CHAPTER II


    Ant language—Stridulatory organs—How white ants
      communicate—Conversation through convulsions—Nests
      in tubes—Detection of a “crepitus”—Mutual
      recognition—Cannibalistic propensities—Royal jealousy—Loyal
      assassins—A kingly feast—Methods of feeding—Foundation of
      colonies—Swarming habits.

IT used to be supposed that such communication as ants are capable of
holding with one another took place entirely, or almost entirely,
through the mutual stroking of the antennæ, and Sir John Lubbock (now
Lord Avebury) was unable to satisfy himself, after numerous experiments,
that they could either hear or utter any sound. It is now known,
however, that not only can some ants emit various sounds at their
pleasure—as, indeed, is sufficiently obvious in the case of one or two
species—but also that they possess special structures enabling them to
do so, and the existence of which is inconceivable, except on the
supposition that they both hear and attach a meaning to the notes thus
evolved. Thus at a meeting of the Entomological Society held in the year
1893, Dr. David Sharp (author of the “Insects” portion of _The Cambridge
Natural History_) declared that “examination revealed the existence in
ants of the most perfect stridulating or sound-producing organs yet
discovered in insects, these being situated on the second and third
segments of the abdomen in certain species. The sounds produced were of
the greatest delicacy, and it appeared doubtful whether the microphone
would be able to assist the human ear in their detection”—which, indeed,
it has not yet done.[7] Later, in the work above mentioned, Dr. Sharp
remarks, “In many ants these parts”—that is to say the abdominal
segments—“bear highly developed stridulating organs, and the delicacy
and perfection of the articulations allow the parts to be moved, either
with or without producing stridulation.”[8]

As these ant utterances are not sufficiently loud to be audible to our
human ears, they must, I suppose, be inferred from the existence of the
organs above-mentioned, and the way in which they work; but this is
surely sufficient data to go upon, since it is hardly possible for one
hard substance to grate upon another silently. Forel, accordingly, as
well as Janet and other observers, now believe sound to be one of the
principal means by which ants hold converse with each other, and it is
interesting to find that Grassi and Sandias have arrived at the same
conclusion in regard to white ants, or termites. Their opinion, together
with the facts upon which it has been founded, is thus expressed:—

“Several writers have mentioned the convulsive movements characteristic
of Termites. These movements, or quiverings, are easily observed in
Calotermes, and may be repeated periodically at very short intervals,
almost at the frequency of the pulse-rate. In the act of quivering, the
legs are held motionless, whilst the body is shaken forwards and
backwards. Sometimes a white ant may stop, whilst running, in order to
quiver one or more times. Occasionally these convulsive movements are
repeated a few times only, and then stop altogether; but at other times
they recur after a few seconds’ or, at most, a few minutes’ rest, and
may thus be continued, sometimes, for hours, at regular or irregular
intervals. In the intervals between successive convulsions the insect
remains still, or progresses for a short distance only. These movements
are executed by all members of the colony except the newly hatched ones.
I have satisfied myself,” continues Professor Grassi, “by careful
observation of the phenomena exhibited in tube-nests, that these
convulsions serve as a cry to summon help or give alarm, or as a lament:
in short as a mode of intercommunication.”[9]

The same observers then go on to tell us that if white ants are
disturbed in any sudden way, as by the too rough shaking of their nest,
or by a light being suddenly flung upon it, or if otherwise annoyed,
“all the members of the colony begin to quiver, except those that are
running briskly about in search of a better situation.”[9] When dying,
too, they will sometimes quiver in this way, at intervals of a few
minutes, for as much as an hour or two, or even longer. Should an
enemy—such as those we have been speaking of—be introduced of a sudden
into the nest, the less valiant members of it prefer to run away, but in
the midst of their retreat they may often be seen to stop and quiver
with unusual energy. Their object in these cases seems to be to raise a
general alarm, nor is it long before they are successful. Again, if
whilst one insect is burrowing into wood another outside should quiver
in this way, the burrower quickly comes out, as though in response to
some signal of alarm. From all this it seems evident that these curious
movements must be accompanied by some sound, or sounds, inaudible to our
human ears, and perhaps having a varied range, and with considerable
power of modulation. To produce them, however, some stridulating or
other organs would seem to be necessary, and of these, though they must,
if there, be visible under the microscope, Professor Grassi says
nothing. Possibly, however, sounds may be produced by the rubbing
together of various parts of the body without any special apparatus
having been developed, in which case the language, if we may call it so,
cannot be so rich or copious.

The above remarks apply more especially to the larger of the two white
ants of Southern Europe. In regard to the smaller one, Professor Grassi
makes the following interesting remarks: “Termes makes the same
convulsive movements as does Calotermes, but the soldier of this species
is able to produce a special creaking sound, which arises, whenever the
head is held horizontally, during the act of quivering, by friction
between the back of the head and the front part of the thorax. But
whenever the head, during this act, is held in the usual position, which
is not quite horizontal, no perceptible sound is produced, owing to the
absence of such friction. The soldiers of Termes, therefore, possess two
distinct modes of communication, whilst those of Calotermes have only
one, in which no perceptible sound is produced. This characteristic
_crepitus_,” continues the Professor, “may be heard, at frequent
intervals, by applying the ear to a tube containing a nest of Termites.
This proves that the quivering motions are a constant feature in
undisturbed nests, so that they cannot be employed only as signals of
alarm or distress. I conclude, therefore, that besides such special
significations these convulsive movements must also have the value of
ordinary speech; that they constitute, in short, a means of
intercommunication. The same conclusion holds good for Calotermes (the
one we have hitherto been talking about), and I imagine that the
quivering of both species produces a sound which is perceptible to the
insects themselves, but inaudible to the human ear.”[9]

Members of the same ant community are known to recognise each other, and
this is no less the case with the white ants, or termites. Thus when a
few of the latter were removed from the termitary and returned to it
after five or six hours, the population showed no signs of alarm—not
scurrying wildly about as they would have done had strangers been
introduced—but remained quiet and orderly. It was objected, however,
though I cannot see the force of such an objection, that the exiles, on
their return, would have instantly recognised their old nest, and thus,
knowing exactly where to go and what to do, they would have created no
disorder, and consequently roused no suspicion, amongst the other
members of the colony. To meet this theory Professor Grassi provided one
of his colonies with a new nest from which he excluded a certain number
of individuals, so that when these were introduced into it, an hour or
two after their companions had settled down in their fresh abode, it
was, of course, quite unfamiliar to them. In spite of this, however,
they caused no disturbance, but were clearly recognised as friends.
When, however, a few strangers of the same species were introduced, they
created great alarm amongst the rightful proprietors, who scattered in
all directions. In a little while, however, all was again quiet, and as
no fighting was observed, it would appear that, amongst the termites,
strangers from different nests soon become friendly with one another.
This, however, applies to the commoners only, it is not the same where
royalty is concerned. Thus when a second king and queen were introduced
into a termitary already provided with a pair, they were at once
attacked by the subjects of the latter, who loyally bit off their legs.
Two days afterwards the reigning queen was herself seen to attack the
male pretender, or rather unfortunate victim of scientific curiosity.
He, however, though without legs to assist him, managed to drag himself
away, but was afterwards found dead, with the outraged queen nibbling
vindictively at his mutilated stumps. Next day the stranger queen was
also found dead, and the same thing always happened whenever the
experiment was repeated. Sometimes, indeed, the supernumerary royal
pair, or pairs, had disappeared altogether, from which it seems clear
that they must have been not only killed, but eaten.

Cannibalism, indeed, is rather an institution than a vice in the
termitary. To begin with, the cast skin of every member is eaten by the
others as a matter of course. With this view, any individual who is
ready to moult receives the skilled aid of two or more assistants, who
either eat the outer portion of their friend, bit by bit, as they shred
it off, or else carry it away whole and devour it at their leisure.
Sometimes, moreover, one, after licking another affectionately, in the
way that ants do, may be seen to give it a covert bite, as though
desirous of something more filling, whilst any sick member is eaten by
its companions before it is dead. Royalty is not exempt from this
treatment, and, on one occasion, nine individuals, including one
soldier, were observed by Professor Grassi in the act of enjoying a meal
on the body of a substitute king who was in process of moulting. The
wretched animal was still alive, and writhed all over its body, to free
itself from the torture. The nine assassins were probably annoyed at the
light, for they at once stopped eating, and jointly carried off the
victim to a darker part of the nest. Meanwhile many others crowded up to
partake in this feast of royal flesh.[9]

A soldier, too, has been observed to kill and partially eat one of its
worker companions, nor is it altogether uncommon for an individual of
any class, after licking, for some little while, the leg of another,
suddenly to snap it off. The bond of union, therefore, though
sufficiently developed to allow of an elaborate social organisation, is
not so strong between members of the same termitary as it is in the case
of ants, amongst which latter such unseemly conduct is never known to
occur. So, too, unless a particular chemical substance, which seems to
have a maddening effect, be flung amongst them, ants of one community
never attack each other. Amongst white ants, however, warfare will
occasionally break out within the nest, more especially if this be
disturbed, in which case the soldiers are apt to turn savagely on those
nearest to them, perhaps considering them as the cause of the calamity.
Still, upon the whole, order, and, if not friendship, at least
co-operation, is conspicuously displayed, and the majority often
interfere to put a stop to such individual or partial combats as may
from time to time break out.

There is more excuse for the soldier termites in their cannibalistic
propensities, since owing to the special development of their jaws,
which are long and slender, they are unable to triturate wood, which is
the basis of diet of these insects. They might die, therefore, but for
such occasional lapses, were it not the common practice for all members
of the community to feed one another, though the soldiers, for the above
reason, are much more dependent on such aid. The food thus administered
has just been swallowed by the individual who parts with it. Such
transfer is performed in two ways, the first of which is familiar
enough—that process, namely, known as regurgitation—but the second and
more staple one is too peculiar to be dealt with in a non-scientific
work. When a termite regurgitates, an exceedingly small round pellet of
reddish-brown colour may be seen, by attentive observation, to form
about the mouth, and gradually to increase in size till it becomes
plainly apparent, and is seen to consist of food—that is to say,
wood—which has previously been swallowed, in a moistened and softened
condition. Sometimes this pellet is used for building purposes, but
often another termite comes forward, receives, and swallows it.

Another article of diet which has a peculiar efficacy, and is used for a
certain purpose, has been already alluded to—viz. saliva. This, we are
told, “issues,” when required to do so, “as a colourless and distinctly
alkaline liquid. It collects on the labium (the insect equivalent of
lips) as a small drop, which may be employed either as a cement in
building or as food for others. These may either possess themselves of
the drop and then retreat a little way in order to swallow it gradually,
or they may receive it from the one which secretes it and clearly
provides it for them as an article of diet. The assimilation of a drop
requires a certain number of acts of deglutition, which may be counted,
and are usually four or five.”[9] Very young larvæ (the whole community,
it must be remembered, are either in this or the pupal state) are fed
after this fashion, until sufficiently advanced to be able to swallow
wood-meal. Under this course of diet the abdomen becomes remarkably
transparent, and this, in older individuals, is an indication that they
are being bred up by the workers to become royal substitutes. The
development, therefore, of termites from the larval to the perfect, or,
at least, the sexually perfect form, seems to be wholly dependent on
their being fed with this substance.

As is well known, the body of the queen termite, in the African and
other tropical species, swells, when about to lay, to an enormous size,
but this is not nearly so noticeably the case with her European
representatives. Neither is a cell, in this case, constructed for her
accommodation, but the royal pair, whether they are true king and queen,
or only substitutes, “remain, in close proximity, in the heart of the
nest, where the inmates are always most crowded.” They are not
imprisoned, therefore; but can go from one place to another, should
they, as sometimes happens, wish to change their situation. In this they
would seem to be happier than their more specially accommodated royal
cousins, but no doubt, with the latter, or at any rate with the queen,
the instinct of locomotion ceases with the capacity to indulge in it.
The purpose of the specially made cell is probably rather to guard than
to restrain the queen.

In regard to the swarming of white ants—another habit in which we are
reminded both of ants and bees—with the subsequent founding of a new
colony, Professor Grassi has the following remarks to make. They apply
more especially to the larger of the two European species, viz.
Calotermes. “Before swarming,” he tells us, “they collect near one of
the exit-holes of the termitary, and when the proper time comes, issue
from it in ones or twos, so that the twenty or thirty members who are
ready to take flight emerge in perhaps a quarter of an hour. Once
outside, they run upwards, if the locality admits of it, for a few
metres, and then only do they take wing. In a room they fly towards the
light, and if a wind is blowing they follow its direction. Some,
becoming tired, settle soon upon trunks of trees, and all may do this
eventually. Here they group themselves into pairs, the males and females
of which must frequently be derived from separate nests, since the sexes
swarm separately; this acts as a safeguard by which Calotermes
habitually avoids in and in breeding. Matrimonial alliances having been
thus formed, the work of excavation commences, each pair seeking for
some decayed spot in which to bury themselves and become, in time, the
parents of a fresh community. The wings, by this time, have been got rid
of. They may be shed by coming into contact with an obstacle, or by
getting damp and adhering to some spot, while the insect continues to
move. But, if not favoured by chance, the Calotermite purposely rids
itself of these now useless encumbrances. Thus four perfect insects were
captured after flying about the room, and put under a piece of rotten
wood. Hardly had they settled when they stripped off their wings by
resting the tips against some projecting corner of the wood, and then
moving backwards a little, so that the wings bent near the base, broke,
and dropped off. When rid of them they began to gnaw the wood, at first
along and then across the grain. When they encountered each other by
chance they first threatened to bite one another, and then ran off in
opposite directions. This was because they were of the same sex. Had
they been of opposite ones, an attachment, under such circumstances,
would no doubt have been formed between them.”[9]

This is all the space which I can afford to these interesting insects.
There are many other points in connection with them which I might have
touched upon, but I thought it better to say less about what may be read
by anyone in a score or so of works, and select as my text-book a series
of the closest and most interesting observations, which lie buried in
the pages of a scientific journal not at all likely to meet the public
eye. Where possible, I shall be guided by the same or a similar
principle throughout this small work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER III


    Ants and white ants—Guest insects—Ants’-nest beetles—Doubtful
      relations—A strange forbearance—Yellow ants and white
      wood-lice—Beetles fed by ants.

FROM what has been said about the Termites in the last chapter, it is
clear that they very much resemble ants in their habits, so that it is
no wonder that they have long passed for ants in popular estimation.
Such a similarity is quite enough to justify one part of the name, as
names go; and as for the word white, which entomologists are always
complaining about, that is quite near enough too, for though their
bodies are not white, but yellow, yet the greater part of them—the soft
fat abdomen, which particularly catches the eye—is of such a light
yellow that it suggests white in contrast to the darker colouring of
most ants. Scientific men—unless their particular science is
philology—are dreadful pedants in regard to names, and always want to
substitute their own manufactured ones, which have no real life in them,
for what has sprung up naturally on the lips of the people. Thus,
instead of hedge-sparrow—a name that explains itself to anyone who has
seen the bird and knows something of its ways—ornithologists would have
us say “hedge-accentor”—a preposterous concoction—and stormy petrel
should, according to them, be “storm-petrel,” because the bird itself
cannot be stormy, whatever the sea may be. No imagination behind the
common use of language, then. No poetic transference of attributes. All
is to be as prosy as professors can make it, and “we must speak by the
card, or equivocation will undo us.” But names, which are a part of
language, come into being as language itself does—spontaneously, that is
to say, and by a natural growth. They are right because they exist; and
the very errors contained in them—telling, as they do, of popular
beliefs and superstitions—are of greater and wider interest than the
rectitudes of a few pedants. Could they play with substance as they can
with breath, these wise simpletons would first draw up a theory of
anatomy, and then annul all bodies that did not conform to it. Such and
such a word or name is wrong, in their eyes, though it exists quite as
naturally as any nerve or muscle, and is quite as tough though only made
of air. This last they will find if they live long enough, and
“hedge-sparrow” and “stormy petrel” will survive all their lifeless
substitutions, though embalmed in many dull paragraphs of many dull
books.

But let us come back from words to things. Much as the white ants
resemble real ones in many of their habits, the more remarkable ones
that distinguish the latter are not practised by them. They make no
slaves and keep no domestic animals—at least I have never heard of their
doing so, though in natural history one must always be prepared for new
discoveries. Many insects do, in fact, live with them in the termitary,
just as others live in the formicaries of ants, and it is quite possible
that, when these have been better studied, some of them will be found to
have special relations—involving mutual intelligent action—with their
landlords.

At present, however, we seem to have little or no information on this
head. With ants it is different, and perhaps one of the most interesting
chapters in their history is that which has to do with these
_myrmecophilous_, or guest insects, as they are called.[10] Take, for
instance, the ants’-nest beetles, and especially one family—the
_Paussidæ_—which numbers some 200 species, every one of which passes the
whole of its life, when not flying by night, within the nest of some
species of ant. These beetles are small, as might be expected, the
largest being not more than half an inch in length, but present an
extraordinary appearance owing to the antennæ ending in two broad
palmated surfaces, like the horns of a moose deer, which project
outwards, one on each side, at right angles with two short stalks,
forming the only serviceable joints of these strangely modified feelers.
All the other ones (in some species, at any rate) have been fused and
welded together to form these flattened club-like structures, the use of
which is not at first-sight apparent, and may not be fully understood.
If, however, a _paussus_ is laid on its back upon a flat surface, a
predicament which would be as embarrassing to many beetles as it is to a
turtle, one of their special functions is at once seen. Turning back the
two clubs till they rest on the ground, and making the joint rigid, the
insect uses the one most conveniently placed as a lever, and soon gets
on to its legs again. Could we imagine that such an expedient would
often need to be resorted to, the curious modification of the antennæ is
at once explained; but it probably rarely happens that any small beetle
finds itself on its back in a place where there are no irregularities to
aid it in righting itself. Possibly, however, the smooth galleries or
chambers of some of the larger ants might expose these _Myrmicophilæ_ to
such a catastrophe, though, for my part, I suppose that the antennæ are
used in some other special way which is of far more importance to their
owners.

The relations existing between the ants and these curious beetles has
not yet been fully made out. It is true that the various species of
_Paussidæ_ have upon some part of their bodies a smooth downy
substance—a _pubescence_, to use the word dear to entomologists—which in
other ants’-nest beetles is known to exude a sweet honey-like dew which
the ants, not unnaturally, are very fond of, and for which they
assiduously lick them. As they have also been seen to lick their
_Paussi_, we seem, here, to have at least the root of the matter, nor
does the fact that, at other times, when perhaps these have ceased to
supply the attraction, they pay little attention to them, seem of much
importance, since we are all neglected when we have given what we have
to give. But there are other circumstances not of so straightforward a
nature. It has been lately discovered by a French observer—M.
Péringuey—that these _Paussidæ_, welcome guests as they generally are,
will yet, sometimes, eat the larvæ of the ants with whom they live, when
any small worker is engaged in carrying them from one place to another.
The ants resent this, and occasionally a large one, who feels himself
equal to the undertaking, will attack and even kill a _Paussus_ that he
sees behaving in such a manner. Yet, with all this, so valued are these
beetles by the ants that they often drag them back into their nests,
when they have approached, or emerge from, the entrance. On such
occasions, and also when the ants attack and even dismember them, the
_Paussidæ_ make no sort of resistance. Yet they are extremely well able
to do so, being armed with a weapon of tremendous efficiency, by which
in a moment they could kill or stun a whole crowd of ants round about
them. For they are bombardier beetles, having the power at any moment of
discharging a fluid of a highly acrid nature, and so volatile that, on
coming in contact with the air, it explodes with a puff of blue smoke,
exhaling at the same time a very pungent and unpleasant odour. When they
are tickled with a straw, even, this bombardment at once takes place,
and ants all round are seen to stagger or drop to the earth. Small
workers are killed, large ones retreat in confusion; yet the owner of
this deadly battery, which can only have been developed for the express
purpose of overwhelming an enemy, will not, even to save life or limb,
discharge it against an ant—not one, at least, to whom it stands in
these somewhat doubtful relations.

How have these relations—whatever in their entirety they may be—come
about? My own idea is that these beetles, like some other
creatures—amongst them the little white wood-louse that lives with our
own _Formica flava_—found ants’ nests very comfortable places of
retirement, since, by reason of their peculiar weapon of defence, they
could defy any attempt to interfere with them, on the part of the ants.
The ants, on their side, would soon have given up molesting them, so
that, never requiring to defend themselves against the creatures by whom
they were surrounded, the intruders got to associate them with quite
other ideas, and, having first lost the habit, at length lost the power
of turning their artillery in this direction. Meanwhile _Paussus_, owing
to its sweet secretion, which, after relations had once become amicable,
the ants would soon have discovered, had got to be a very welcome guest,
so much so that, even when it took to eating their larvæ, they retained
their love for it, as a species, though resenting such conduct upon the
individual. And now the once redoubtable invader could be punished with
impunity, for the habit of never discharging against an ant had become a
fixed, inherited instinct, not to be got rid of even though life were at
stake. Thus, as it appears to me, it may have come about that, though
armed with dynamite, and carrying bombs, no living _Paussus_ has ever
defended itself against an ant, and no living ant, perhaps, ever seen a
_Paussus_ discharge its artillery. Of course these are only conjectures,
and the last, especially, may be opposed to fact, since it has been
suggested that one way in which _Paussus_ may make itself useful within
the nest of its hosts, may be by bombarding certain obnoxious parasites,
or other would-be invaders. This does not, however, appear to me to be
likely, for how could these explosion take place, under such
circumstances, without doing damage to the ants themselves? In one’s own
house one would hardly wish a bomb to be thrown, even against one’s
greatest enemy—at any rate not in the drawing-room. That the ants
should, by this means, be able, or, if able, willing to rid themselves
of the mites which infest them, as has been conjectured, seems
especially unlikely—indeed, hardly possible. On the whole, it seems to
me that the relations at present existing between the two insects could
only have grown up through _Paussus_ having ceased to discharge, not
only at an ant, but even—owing, probably, to there never being any
occasion for it—in an ants’ nest. The experimental tickling with a straw
was, of course, an artificial stimulus. In spite of its sweet secretion,
I cannot see how a beetle with such a power at its command as _Paussus_
has, can have been originally selected by the ants for domestication,
but, on the other hand, an armed invader might easily, by coincidence,
possess some property which would make it, in time, of use and value to
the population on which it forced itself.

An example of an invader having no such merit, but harmless, and that
has become tolerated through necessity, is, in my opinion, the little
white wood-louse before mentioned. It apparently has now lost the power
of rolling itself into a ball, but when it first began to penetrate into
the galleries of _Formica flava_—our little yellow ant—it may very well
have had it, and this would have rendered it impervious to attack,
whilst its weight and round scaly surface would have made the task of
removing it almost an impossible one. Thus, perforce, it stayed where it
wished to stay, penetrating, perhaps, deeper and deeper into the
labyrinth of galleries, as successive generations of cave animals have
retreated farther and farther from the light of day, until at length,
finding the wherewithal to live, it became wholly subterranean in its
habits, lost the power of doing what it never required to do—namely, of
rolling itself into a ball—and, through the absence of all sunlight,
lost, too, its colouring matter, and became of its present dead,
bleached white. Whether its eyesight, if it ever had any, is also gone,
I do not know; but it can hardly, under present conditions, have any use
for it, whereas its antennæ are constantly moving, and seem to be of
extreme delicacy. I could never observe—for I have kept nests of
_Formica flava_—the smallest sign of any kind of relations between these
wood-lice and their hosts; and if any scavenger work is done by the
former, from which the latter derive benefit, I believe that this is
merely incidental, and that the ants know nothing about it. But they
have got accustomed to the wood-lice being there, and put up with them
because they cannot help it.

It must be remembered, in regard to _Paussidæ_, that the family is
represented by some two hundred species, all of which pass the greater
part of their lives with ants. In regard to this Mr. Kirby remarks: “The
observations made upon the family are so contradictory that the
discrepancies can only be accounted for by supposing that different
species have very different habits. Possibly some species may perform
various useful services to the ants, while others are hostile; or they
may be so useful that the ants are willing to pay toll of a certain
number of their offspring, in return.”[11]

This last, however, does not seem very well to accord with recorded
observations as to ants attacking any individual _Paussus_ whom they may
chance to see devouring their larvæ, nor with the latter refusing to
bombard, under these circumstances, even when in danger of their lives.
It is impossible to imagine a hostile _Paussus_ not bombarding, in such
a case, unless, indeed, we suppose it to have first lost its hostility,
and then again to have become hostile, without, however, regaining the
power of using its natural weapon. But this is a state of affairs hardly
to be conceived.

We probably do not know the whole round of occupations which make up the
life by day, of the _Paussidæ_; of their life by night, we know nothing
at all. The nefarious raids upon the larvæ or eggs (for both are
appreciated) of the ants can hardly be of frequent occurrence, or the
partnership, one would think, must come to an end. Other ant-guests,
however, including sometimes smaller members of their own family, are
likewise preyed upon by these curious beetles, but very frequently, when
observed, they seem to be asleep, nor do they appear then to be taken
much notice of by the ants. Where or under what conditions their eggs
are hatched, or what is the larval and pupal history of each species, we
do not know, but only the perfect insect has as yet been found in any
ants’ nest.

Other beetles that live with ants are either indifferent or hostile to
them, but others, again, are kept and tended in the same manner as are
the aphides, and for a similar purpose. All or most of these secrete
some sweet substance, which their hosts lick up, and, in return, offer
them an asylum from all enemies, and are ready to give them their
personal protection, should this be necessary. They go even further than
this, and actually feed them as they do their own larvæ, with honey, or
something of a similar nature, which they regurgitate from their crops.
One little beetle—_Atemeles_ by name—is extremely fond of such a meal,
and solicits it from the ants by stopping in front of them and assuming
a certain attitude, accompanied with insinuating motions of the antennæ.
Whether _Atemeles_ is able to feed itself, or must live wholly upon
these ministrations, I am not quite sure; but another beetle—poor
_Clavigertestaceus_—is, according to Janet, so entirely dependent upon
the ants for subsistence that, if separated from them, he has nothing to
do but to die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER IV


    Ant parasites—Fleet-footed brigands—Honey-stealing mites—A
      strange table companion—Privileged cockroaches—Ants and
      their riders—A fly-ride on beetle-back.

LEAVING the beetles—though as there are probably some thousands that
live habitually in ants’ nests, we have said very little about them—we
may glance at an extraordinary little creature, in appearance something
like a wood-louse with a fish’s tail, that resides with certain ants on
the footing of a freebooter, constantly stealing from them, and eluding
their resentment by extreme activity, living, as it were, in a state of
perpetual motion. The legs of these persistent yet withal timid brigands
are many and long, which, together with their shape and general
lightness of build, enables them to run with great speed, so that they
easily outdistance the ants, and, escaping to some less frequented part
of the nest, with which they are always well acquainted, remain there
quiet for a time. Should a single ant approach them, however, they
immediately run away, or, if forced by circumstances to be near one or
more—which, in an ants’ nest, must be often difficult to avoid—make a
point, apparently, of never keeping still, as though to confuse them,
or, perhaps, to be the better able to dash off at any instant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The extraordinary looking insect shown towards the top is the
      lepismid, or fleet-foot, who lives by stealing food from
      ants when they are in the act of passing it from one to the
      other. The atemeles beetle shown below is begging food,
      which will not be refused, from the ant in front of him.

The way in which these fleet-foots secure their food is highly
remarkable, each little theft—which has about it more of the parasite
than the brigand—occasioning a group of three. The ants upon which they
live are of the species known as _Lasius umbratus_, and, like many other
kinds, often feed one another, the hungry asking of the full, by whom he
is rarely, if ever, denied. In the process of regurgitation—with which
we are now familiar—the two stand fronting each other, with mandibles
interlocked, and a drop of honey passes from mouth to mouth. For an
instant it trembles between the two, resting on both, and that instant
is the opportunity of the _Lepismid_. Darting forward, he interposes his
own, and having absorbed some portion of the drop _in transitu_, speeds
swiftly away to make a third elsewhere. Such a life, however great may
be the thief’s agility, is full of danger, and, from time to time, an
individual is captured and killed. In nests under observation such
executions may be witnessed, and _Lepismid_ corpses—or, as various
professors prefer calling them, _cadavers_—are sometimes noted. Under
artificial conditions, however, opportunities of escape are much more
limited, unless, indeed, some special provision is made. Thus, when
Professor Wheeler first introduced a colony of _Lasius umbratus_ into
one of his _formicariums_, he found, after a couple of _dies_,[12] five
_Lepismid cadavers_. But having, by the addition to the said
_formicarium_ of a _refugium_, or asylum, made it more as _in natura_,
this mortality ceased, and the remaining _Lepismids_ continued
henceforth _existentes_.

A similar mode of feeding, but under circumstances of much greater
security, is indulged in by _Antennophorus_, another ant-guest, whose
relations with its host are of a still closer description.
_Antennophorus_ is a mite which, according to M. Janet, fixes itself on
to the head, or the sides of the abdomen, of the ant which it affects,
and clings there as long as it sees fit. This it is enabled to do owing
to a special adaptation of the feet, which end in little horny cups
(_cornicula_ is the word here) furnished with some substance of so
adhesive a quality that it might well be called “stickphast,” if no
Latin word were at hand. Not all the feet, however, are of this
description, for the anterior ones are transformed into a pair of long
waving antennæ, which contain olfactory organs of the greatest
sensibility. With these their owner makes up for the want of eyes, and,
smelling and feeling its way, walks, when it wishes to, along the bodies
of its hosts, passing from one to another. Sometimes, either by accident
or otherwise, it becomes detached, and is then helpless as far as
locomotion is concerned, but by no means so in other respects. Its
object, now, is to reaffix itself: nor is it long before it succeeds in
doing so. As it “lies upon the soil in one of the galleries of the nest
it raises and stretches forward its first pair of ambulatory feet, and,
at the same time, explores the space around it with its long antenniform
ones. These appendages are much more agitated when an ant passes close
by. Should it pass near enough, the _Acarid_ (which has a finer sound
than ‘mite’) glues itself on to its body by means of the cup of sticky
material at the end of one of its ambulatory feet, which it holds up
ready for this operation, and it can, in this way, soon climb up and fix
itself in a good position on its host. The latter is surprised, and
seeks to rid itself of its strange companion, but failing in this, it
becomes resigned very quickly (as we do to increased taxation) as soon
as the _Acarid_ has taken up one of its normal positions.”[13] It will
carry two indeed, or even three, without complaining. An ant with one of
these burdens fixed, like the income-tax, to the under side of its head,
and two others, which may stand for a rise in tea and sugar, is a very
common sight.

The feeding of _Antennophorus_ has been closely observed by M. Janet in
his artificial nests, and is thus described by him: “The ants had
acquired a habit of placing themselves, crowded one against another, in
one corner of the nest, and thither came such as had their crops well
filled, after a meal of honey, and disgorged it before the mouths of
their comrades who had none. While the fasting ant was eating the honey
thus disgorged, _Antennophorus_, riding on its head, took its share. To
do this, it pushed itself forward, and thrust its rostrum into the
droplet, and generally, whilst holding itself in position by means of
the two hinder pairs of legs, it attached itself by means of the forward
pair (which in this case, however, would represent antennæ) to the head
of the disgorging ant.”[13] Perhaps there is some little mistake
here—possibly I have not copied the passage correctly. There has been no
hint before as to the modified antenniform legs of the parasite
performing any other office than that of feeling and smelling, whilst
the word “attach” or “affix” is that always used to describe the working
of the sticky, cup-footed ones. In the position described the antennæ
might very well act as supports, but hardly, one would think, in such a
way as that their owner could be described as attaching himself through
their means. Possibly it is the first pair of true legs that act in this
way, but the matter is of no great consequence—not more than a war, say,
or the fall of a ministry, in the general run of things. Suffice it that
we have our picture, the little parasite stretched, like a bridge,
between the heads of the feeding and disgorging ants, and taking its
share with the latter.

_Lasius something_ is the name of the ant which _Antennophorus_ utilises
in this way, and it is, I think, a European species. Another
one—_Pachycondyla harpax_—the large, black ant of America—wears its
parasite round its neck, like an Elizabethan ruff. In this case both
host and guest are in the larval state, and the involuntary partnership
between them—involuntary probably on the part of either—is not dissolved
until both have attained full maturity. The position of affairs is this:
the ant larva apparently lies on its back upon earth a little hollowed,
to receive it, by the workers of the nest. The parasitic larva—that of
an unknown species of fly—has a long, slender neck, as we may call the
anterior part of the body, and whilst this is wound about the
corresponding portion of its host, the body, which broadens out after
the manner of an oil-flask, is affixed by a disc at its end to some part
of the back of the latter. When the ants feed the larvæ, they place the
food—which consists either of grain that has been stored, or of insects
captured and torn up by them—on the broad surface of the abdomen, which
forms a sort of trough for its reception. Immediately upon feeling the
welcome load, the hungry larva stretches down its head to the banquet,
but that of the parasite moves with it, and its small, sharp jaws take
eager toll of each dish. Thus the two feed together, cheek by jowl, and
should what has been provided prove insufficient for this double
onslaught, the unbidden guest will stretch its snake-like neck, and move
it ceaselessly until the ever-ready jaws come into contact with a second
feast, upon the table next it. Should none, however, be within reach,
the guest will give vent to its irritated feelings by biting the bodies
of such unbounteous Timons, or even that of its own host. They wriggle
with pain, and this may possibly induce the ants to bring them fresh
supplies, under the impression that they are hungry, as indeed they may
be, with meals shared in this way. If so, we can hardly suppose a
parasitic larva to act with such a motive, but as the best biters would
in this case get the most food, natural selection may possibly have
helped to develop the habit, which would have a compensating advantage
for the wrigglers too. As the French say, “_Il y a compensation en
tout._”

The parasite, whilst stretching out as far as it can from the body of
its host, in quest of food, remains, all the while, attached to the
latter by the disc in which its body ends. It can, however, leave one
ant larva for another, though Professor Wheeler, to whom we owe this
interesting discovery, believes that it does this “with great
reluctance, and only under urgent circumstances, such as extreme hunger,
the death of the larva to which it is attached, and perhaps, when fully
mature, and about to pupate.”[14] So long, indeed, as its original host,
on whose body, when quite young, it was probably hatched from the egg,
continues well and is well fed, it has no reason to seek farther, since
all its wants are provided for. It is not only fed by the worker ants,
but shares in any other of the benefits which these may bestow upon the
rising generation of the nest. Thus, if they move larvæ, as is
customary, to give them change of temperature, and produce the requisite
hygienic conditions, the parasite is moved along with them, and it is
cleaned also—a still more important advantage possibly—at the same time
as they are. At such times the ants never seem to notice the uncouth
incubus upon the bodies of their infant sisters, though one would
suppose the difficulty would be not to do so. They are, it is true,
blind, or nearly so, but it seems strange that their sense of touch,
which is no doubt delicate, should not be able to inform them, since the
parasite, though small enough, absolutely, is of great size regarded as
an excrescence on its host’s body. This probably is the way in which the
matter presents itself to the ants, if they think about it at all, for
since the two lives are passed constantly together, and are subjected to
the same conditions, it is likely that they share one smell between
them.

But this curious parasitic relation between ant and fly is not confined
to the larval stage of each. Continued observation led to a further
discovery which I give in Professor Wheeler’s own words: “As the days
passed, the mature ant-larvæ spun their brown cocoons one by one, and
one by one the mature commensals (the larval parasites, that is to say)
disappeared. No traces of them could be discovered. The only remaining
resource was to open the cocoons. Five were opened, and in two of recent
formation commensals were found! Having shared the table of their host,
they had come to share its bed as well. The dipteron (the parasite, as I
have said, is a fly) had pupated after the manner of its kind, forming a
puparium, that is, instead of spinning a cocoon like the ant larva: the
dead larval skin, somewhat shrivelled and contracted, was used as an
envelope, and within this the pupa proper was found. In all cases the
puparium was located in the caudal pole (at the bottom) of the ant
cocoon, and was immovably stuck to the wall of the cocoon, its anterior
end directed towards the cephalic pole”[14] (the top). But what, asks
Professor Wheeler, does the commensal larva do “while the ant-larva is
weaving its cocoon? Does it move about to avoid the swaying jaws of the
spinning larva? or does it take up its position, from the first, at the
posterior end of the larval ant, and there remain motionless while the
posterior pole of the cocoon is being completed? It is very difficult to
answer these questions.”[14]

One might think that young ants thus deprived, day by day, of a portion
of every meal, would be stunted in their growth, and not make such large
and healthy workers as those who had never been encumbered with a
parasite. This, however, does not seem to be the case, and no difference
can be detected between the one and the other. Perhaps, therefore, ants
habitually eat, if not more than is good for them, at least more than
they require. This is the case almost universally amongst civilised men,
at least in Northern Europe, and with savages to a still greater extent
whenever the wherewithal is at hand. In the above case we have, as
Professor Wheeler remarks, a very perfect example of what is termed
commensalism, in the original meaning of the word—that is to say, of two
or more individuals dining together at the same table. As applied to
natural history, the individuals in question must be of different
species, but it is not often that the definition otherwise is so
rigorously adhered to.

This curious parasite inhabits the nests, or, more strictly speaking,
the bodies, of an ant, native to Texas, that has long been famous as a
storer of grain, but whose supposed still further achievements in an
agricultural direction would now seem open to doubt. In the nest of
another American ant, which most certainly does grow mushrooms, the same
observer found another “_myrmecophile_,” or ants’ nest insect, viz. a
minute species of cockroach that lives its life amongst the caves and
galleries of the great vegetable mass which forms, and is designed to
form, the mushroom bed, upon the product of which it feeds. Here again
the ants have become thoroughly reconciled to the presence amongst them
of a guest from which, as far as can be seen, they derive no benefit,
whilst having to submit to a loss, through its agency, of some part of
the fruits of their labours. These little cockroaches are fairly
numerous, and have become so adapted to living in darkness that their
eyes have almost disappeared. Another loss, or partial loss, is of a
more curious nature, and, one might think, would be a great privation to
them. Their antennæ, namely, are always incomplete, but this does not
seem to have come about by a gradual process of atrophy, but rather to
have been caused by mutilation during their owners’ lifetime. But how
has this happened, and what has been the mutilating agency? Professor
Wheeler’s explanation, which he believes to be the only one, is that
their antennæ have been unconsciously sheared off by the ants, whilst
engaged either in clipping their mushrooms or in cutting up the pieces
of leaves which they are continually bringing into the nest, to add to
the bed on which they grow. “It is easy,” he says, “to understand how an
insect like a cockroach, living in the midst of thousands of ants which
are continually opening and closing their scissor-like mandibles, should
be certain, sooner or later, to have its long antennæ cropped. One
wonders how the tarsi (the legs, that is to say) of the cockroach escape
the same treatment.”[15] This wonder, however, if there is really any
reason for it, suggests a doubt as to the sufficiency of the explanation
here offered. The antennæ, one would think, might be held high, in which
case, if sheared at all, it could only be at the base, but if here (as
would not, however, seem to be the case) why should not the legs be
sheared too? Again, it seems possible that the insects themselves may be
in the habit of gnawing one another’s antennæ. As the cockroaches live
and flourish it would seem that this mutilation of their antennæ, if
that, indeed, be the explanation, can do them no great injury. Yet these
organs are supposed to be of great importance to insects, and, judging
by their length and delicacy, one would think that they were especially
so to the members of the cockroach family. In this case they would
probably be extremely careful of them, and the fact that these
ants’-nest cockroaches do not seem to be so, may show that subterranean
conditions, contrary to what one might have expected, have affected
their efficacy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Enjoyment seems to be the only motive the fly has for riding
      on the back of the African beetle shown in the upper part of
      this illustration. Beneath is shown the well named honey-pot
      ant with its distended body full of honey, which it gives
      away to any hungry working ant.

A diet of mushrooms, or fungus, is not the only thing for which these
little blind, light-shunning cockroaches are indebted to their
landlords, the ants, for often one of them may be seen to mount upon one
of the latter, and take a ride on its back. They seem especially fond of
the soldiers, as horses, and will sit perched on their enormous heads,
as they walk up and down in a stately sort of way, sometimes for quite a
long time. Enjoyment seems here to be the only motive, and perhaps it is
a natural one, since there is a fly in Africa which seems to have quite
a passion for riding on the back of a beetle. “Across the mouth of the
Seyhouse,” says the Rev. Mr. Eaton, “on sandy pasture-land bordering the
seashore, big _coprophagous_ beetles—it sounds abusive, but no harm is
meant—are common, sheltering in large holes in the soil, when at rest,
and running about on business. A small species of _Borborinæ_ (that is
the fly) may often be seen riding on their backs, chiefly on the
pronotum and about the bases of the elytra, sometimes half a dozen
females on one beetle. The beetles occasionally throw themselves on
their backs, and try to get rid of them by rolling; but the flies elude
all their efforts to dislodge them, dodging out of harm’s way into the
jointures of the thorax, and darting from back to breast, and back
again, in a way that drives the beetle nearly mad. In vain she scrapes
over them with her legs, in vain does she roll over, or delve down
amongst the roots of the herbage: the flies are as active as monkeys
(not perhaps a very striking simile here), and there is no shaking them
off. It is difficult (such is their strange predilection) to get them
off into the killing-bottle. Nothing (not even the killing-bottle)
persuades them to fly, and they would very much rather stick to the
beetle than——” what? Not go to heaven, but “be driven off it down the
tube.”[16] The tube must be the neck of that same bottle. This, surely,
is a case of infatuation if ever there was one. Eccentric fly! And what
must be the charms of a beetle that can prevail over those of cyanide of
potassium! But the beetle, it must be remembered, is a _coprophagous_
one. There may be a world of explanation in a word like that.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER V


    From biped to quadruped—Flies that borrow
      wings—Sit-o’-my-head—A novel cradle—Flies that kill
      bees—Nature’s sadness—Consolations of the future—The Tachina
      fly and the locust.

ALTHOUGH from the way in which the story is told, one might imagine that
the fly here was merely enjoying a ride upon beetle-back, yet, from the
efforts made by the latter to shake off its persecutors, and, still
more, because these were of the female sex, the probability is that we
have here to do with a case of parasitism. The fly, we may almost feel
certain, was endeavouring to lay its eggs, and the reason why she took
so long about it was that she required a certain spot upon the beetle in
order to do so, and that the beetle’s efforts, though appearing futile,
were more or less successful in guarding this spot. At any rate, if this
was not the case here, it is so in many other instances, various flies
being parasitic on various other insects. Not all of these are fatal to
the object of their choice, which, if it affords them board as well as
lodgings, may only do so to the extent of its blood. Such are the
curious family of _Hippoboscidæ_, or Bird Ticks, who begin life with
wings, but are so little appreciative of the powers which these confer
that, having found the creature upon whom they elect to live, they bite
them off, or otherwise wilfully rid themselves of them, after the manner
of ants and termites, thus offering yet another example in the insect
world of

                        “one whose hand,
                  Like the poor Indian, flung a pearl away
                  Richer than all his tribe.”

For what can be imagined more glorious to possess, speaking of physical
attributes, than the power of flight?

The course of life of these flies—if all be truth that is spoken of
them—is, indeed, very extraordinary, for during the first or winged
stage of their adult life they live on birds, but migrate from them to
some quadruped—as, say, a deer—as soon as they find themselves within
easy reach of it, and then, as having reached their final place of
abode, do away with their wings. Thus, being too lazy or lethargic to
fly themselves, they choose rather to stand indebted to another being
for a power which they no doubt once possessed in perfection, and which
they are still quite capable of exercising. What the larval stage of
these flies is, whether they lay their eggs upon their first or last
habitation—or on both, and if not, where or in what manner the larva
passes its life, I do not know, and as my authority, who should be up to
date, holds his peace upon the matter, I conclude that it is not yet
made out. Possibly the grub is a vegetable feeder, or possibly, again,
it is as fatal to some other insect as is that of a little fly with a
big name—_Apocephalus pergandei_ to wit—to ants. The victim here
chosen—if there be not others also—is a black tree-climbing ant, common
in Pennsylvania. As it runs over the ground or up and down the trunks of
trees, the fly darts after it on tiny wings, intent on laying her egg
upon its neck. The ant tries to elude her endeavours, but
_Apocephalus_—or Sit-o’-my-head—has a mission to fulfil, and will take
no denial. The egg is laid, it cannot be detached, and, when hatched,
the issuing grub bores, with enthusiasm, into the head of the ant.
Coming to the brain he has nothing to do but to eat it, and he does so
until the whole cavity of the skull has become an empty chamber, except
for his own presence there. The movements of the ant during this
process—of its feelings we have no record—have become more and more
erratic, and it feels itself less and less capable of performing its
duties as a member of an active and industrious community. At length it
falls down, and not long afterwards its head falls off, giving to the
maggot inside it its first opportunity of looking out into the world
through the window of the neck-hole. Hitherto its life, however easy and
pleasant, has been of a sedentary nature, but now it can enjoy the
pleasures of a walk, and moves about something after the manner of a
snail, dragging its cephalic shell behind it. But this active state is
not of long duration. The time of change is at hand, and snug within the
ant’s head and its own last larval skin, which, as is the way with fly
caterpillars, serves it in lieu of a cocoon, the fortunate little
creature turns into a chrysalis, and dreams away its time till, on some
sunny day, it issues from its cradle a happy, active fly, feeling
strangely attracted by ants.

Another little fly belonging to this same family group—the hump-backed
flies or _Pharidæ_—has it fate linked with that of bees, in whose hive
it is hatched and on whose eggs and larvæ it feeds; nor does the grown
bee itself, though armed with its sting, escape from the more rapacious
members of the order. These are known by the name of Robber Flies,
though as the robbery involves the death of the victim, and consists of
the juices of its body, murder would seem to be the better word. These
flies, though of somewhat slender build, which the better fits them for
their swift and darting flight, are excessively strong, as might be
expected from their long muscular-looking legs and rough hairy bodies.
All sorts of insects are their prey, for the despatch of which they are
furnished with a hard tubular beak, enclosing, as in a sheath, a
lancet-like instrument, which, being protruded at will, severely
lacerates the body of the captive. The beak, or sheath, is also struck
some way into the wound, and being tipped with bristles, these serve as
so many barbs to keep it in position, whilst the blade continues to
probe and hack the victim, on whose back the fly has descended,
embracing it with its powerful legs. “These flies,” says Dr. Fitch—who
seems strangely unalive to the moral beauty underlying the mere
mechanical expression of it—“are inhuman murderers, they are savages of
the insect world, putting their captives to death with merciless
cruelty. Their large eyes, divided into such a multitude of facets,
probably give them the most acute and accurate vision for espying and
seizing their prey; and their long, stout legs, their bearded and
bristly head, their whole aspect indicates them to be of a predatory and
ferocious character. Like the hawk, they swoop upon their prey, and
grasping it securely between their fore feet, they violently bear it
away.”[17] Bees, beetles, butterflies, moths, even grasshoppers are thus
treated, and sometimes, by a beautiful retributive arrangement—enough to
throw one into ecstasies—they turn cannibals, and prey upon each other.
Nay, there is even more than this to arouse our admiration, for so stern
and unbending is the law of eternal justice, that even the softest
feelings of nature are not allowed to interfere with it, and the female,
wooed by the male, is frequently compelled to eat him. Thus the noble
maxim of _fiat justitia ruat cælum_, though, for a time, it may seem to
be in abeyance, finds, at last, unconscious expression, if not in the
breast, at least in the appetite of a cruel and murderous insect; and
thus in the animal world, not less than in our human one, “the whirligig
of time brings in his revenges.”

To bee-keepers—and to bees perhaps still more so—these terrible
buccaneer flies are especially obnoxious. Poised in air, in the
neighbourhood of some hive, they watch the issuing and returning stream,
and, making swift choice of a victim, sweep, like the wingéd furies that
they are, upon him. There is a sharp, shrilly sound, as the bee’s wings
vibrate, for a moment, more rapidly, then the fatal legs wrap her round,
and, pressed tightly to the oppressor’s body, she is borne to some shrub
or flower, in the shade or pleasant fragrance of which the juices of her
body are sucked out, through a hole specially made to allow of their
passage. When nothing remains but the empty shell, the fly drops this,
and returns to the scene of its labours. Through all the hot sunny hours
these raids are continued, till hundreds of empty bee-shells strew the
ground. As the sun declines the sport flags and gradually ceases, but it
begins again the following morning as merrily as ever. America seems to
be the home _par excellence_ of these flies, but they are represented,
under various forms, in many parts of the world. The United States has
been accorded its fair share of them, and according to their numbers,
each season, the labours of the bee-farmer are rewarded or otherwise. So
much is this the case that the fact that “during certain seasons, in a
bee-raising district of New York, not a single hive threw off a
swarm”[17] has been attributed to this cause alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Poised in the air, the buccaneer fly selects its victim from
      the bees issuing from a hive, pounces on it like a winged
      fury, and kills its hapless prey. The insect depicted
      beneath is protected from its enemies by its strange
      resemblance to a dead leaf.

It would appear from these facts either that no bee ever succeeds in
stinging its assailant, or else that the latter is proof against the
injection of poison. The former seems to me the most probable, since the
system of the bee itself has no such immunity. It seems strange that so
deadly a weapon should fail thus constantly, at a pinch, and it would be
interesting to know if these redoubtable adversaries attack wasps as
well as bees. As it is not stated that they do so—as wasps are pointedly
omitted from the list made out of their victims—the contrary may, I
think, be assumed, and also, as a corollary, that if wasps were attacked
they would be able to use their sting, probably with fatal effect. This
superior capability is, no doubt, owing to the superior flexibility of a
wasp’s abdomen over that of a bee; and if we ask ourselves what is the
cause of this—how and for what reason the superiority has been
acquired—the answer seems “as ready as a borrower’s cap,” viz. “as a
means of self-defence through a process of natural selection.” Nothing
could be better adapted to bring this process into play than the very
ordeal through which the bee is passing; for if some could only succeed,
through superior flexibility, in stinging the flies, they ought to
increase at the expense of those unable to do so. As far as it goes,
this seems to point to the wasp having gone through a longer course of
development than the bee—to its ancestry dating farther back in time;
but when we think of the latter’s more elaborate social organisation and
the greater perfection of its cells, one feels inclined to reverse this
opinion. As no bees possess such powers of twisting about and doubling
round their abdomens as do wasps, though some can do so in a very fair
degree, it seems probable that the common ancestor of all the species
was more thickly built than that of the wasps, or at least that the
potential capacity handed down by it of development in this direction
was less. But precisely the same argument may be used in regard to the
brain of the ancestral wasp, and thus we see that unless we have
geological evidence on the subject it is very difficult to say which of
two species has the more ancient descent.

The Robber Flies—whose scientific name I have forgotten—however
disagreeable they may be, are at least not parasites. They attack their
prey and kill it quickly, instead of handing it over to prolonged
torture at the hands of the next generation. This last is what the
Tachina flies—to say nothing of other kinds—do, who, as they principally
attack caterpillars, may be considered beneficial to man. In the United
States of America there is no greater destroyer of all sorts of trees
than the so-called army-worm caterpillar, or rather grub—for it
represents a fly merely—which gathers together in enormous numbers when
about to enter the pupal state. “I have seen,” says Mr. Leland Howard,
“vast armies of the army-worm, comprising, unquestionably, millions of
individuals, and have been unable to find a single specimen which did
not bear the characteristic eggs of a Tachina fly. These flies were
present in such numbers that their buzzing as they flew over the army of
caterpillars could be heard at some distance, and the farmers were
unnecessarily alarmed, since they conceived the idea that the flies were
the parents of the caterpillars, and were flying everywhere and laying
their eggs in the grass and wheat. As a matter of fact, one great
outbreak of the army-worm in northern Alabama in the early summer of
1881 was completely frustrated by the Tachina flies, aided by a few
other parasites and predatory insects. They also attack grasshoppers,
bugs, beetles, saw-flies and saw-fly larvæ, humble bees, and wasps. (How
they avoid the sting of the latter we are not told; perhaps their
insignificant size is a protection.) The eggs are stuck by some sort of
gummy substance to the surface of the preyed-on insect; and the small
white eggs are frequently seen sticking to the back of some unfortunate
caterpillar. From the under side of each egg there hatches a little
maggot, which bores its way through the skin of the host, and penetrates
into its body, where it lives, nourishing itself upon the fatty matter
and lymph until it reaches full growth, usually, if not always,
destroying before it emerges some vital organ, so as to cause the death
of the host insect. It almost invariably issues, when full grown, from
the body of the insect attacked, and pupates, at or near the surface of
the ground, within the last larval skin, which hardens into a brown oval
puparium.”[17] There are some points of special interest about the
parasitism of these Tachina flies, which seem to be directed by a less
perfect instinct than that which guides other insects of similar habits;
for instance, the Ichneumon flies, which, however, are such merely in
name, being members of the order _Hymenoptera_, which includes the bees
and ants.

These latter, by merely touching an insect with their antennæ, can tell
if it is already occupied—in which case they withdraw—nor do they ever
lay eggs in excess of the number of issuing larvæ that can be supported
by the little world of provender into which they will be born. Neither
do they choose a caterpillar to lay on, which is just about to cast its
skin, by which manœuvre the host would escape, and the guests be left to
perish. All these mistakes, however, are frequently made by the Tachina
fly, the consequence being that many poor children die of starvation;
whilst others, from wanting their necessary complement of food, have
their growth checked and become poor pitiable objects, less than half
the size that, with a more generous diet, they would certainly have
attained to. It is painful to know that such privation exists and to
have no means of relieving it; but nature is full of sadness, and it is
best to look truth in the face. Some comfort may perhaps be derived by
looking forward to a distant future, when the instinct which is now
liable to these errors shall have been perfected. Such comfort, at any
rate, lives in Mr. Leland Howard’s views that “the parasitic mode of
life in the Tachina fly is one of comparatively recent acquirement, and
that sufficient time has not elapsed since they began to take on this
habit”[17] to allow of its having reached the final goal towards which
it is always advancing. It is difficult, however, to console oneself for
the imperfections of a work-a-day world in a far distant prospect of
Elysium.

In the somewhat numerous list of insects distinguished by the attentions
of the Tachina fly, grasshoppers have been mentioned. In Africa they,
or, at any rate, one species of the family, attack the terrible plague
locust, that has from time to time committed, and still apparently
commits, such terrible devastations. The latter seems quite aware of the
fate in store for it, and makes vigorous efforts to evade its destiny.
Buzzing in the air, above the ravenous horde, the fly waits for one to
hop or rise on the wing, and then darts swiftly upon it. To avoid her,
the locust rises or sinks, tacks suddenly to right or left, scudding
this way and that like a ship to meet a varying breeze. The Tachina, in
the meanwhile, circles about her quarry, awaiting a favourable
opportunity, which generally arises just as the locust alights, or is on
the point of alighting, when, descending upon it before the lost impetus
can be renewed, she clings lovingly, and deposits her eggs, either on
the neck or under one of the wings,

                       “——and with a little pin
             Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king.”

It is not, however, as a rule, till after the grub or grubs have made
their exit from the body that the locust dies, though it has drooped and
become languid for some time. Of the vast swarms that darken the sky and
descend upon the country, like a mantle, a very small proportion would
seem to perish in this way, since everywhere the females may be seen
drilling with their abdomens into the ground, preparatory to laying
their eggs. The check upon their numbers, whatever it may be—and on the
whole it must be very effective—supervenes, for the most part, at this
early stage, before the egg is hatched, that is to say.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER VI


    The burden of the locusts—Classical nonsense—Address
      to Mahomet—Locusts in Europe—Succumb to the English
      climate—Described by Darwin—Locusts in Africa—The wingless
      host do greatest damage—Hoppers and jumpers—“An army on the
      march.”

LOCUSTS are insects famous in story, and when one reads about them in
various entomological or other writings, one might imagine that the
whole world had been doing little else, ever since it began, than play a
losing match with these creatures. It is only after one has gone a
little about the world, and lived for some time in regions noted as
their head-quarters without seeing anything whatever of them, that one
begins to doubt this view, and lean towards another one, viz. that they
are fabulous animals; but truth, as in other cases where two extreme
views are held, lies somewhere betwixt and between. The whole matter is
this, that when one reads one narrative after another, with its burden
of a darkened sun, devastated territories, strong winds, drownings in
the sea, and pestilences engendered by innumerable carcases cast up
along hundreds of miles of beach, the intervals, as well as the
countries, between each one of these occurrences, are annihilated in the
imagination, and the dates, if seen, are forgotten. Thus, to use the
Kaffir expression—which has not yet lost its meaning for a civilised
European—one sees everything red; locusts are very convincing—“you may
almost hear the beating of their wings.”

However, there is no doubt that these insects, in relation to man, have
played what the Germans call “_eine bedeutende Rolle_” in the world, and
are worth saying something about, if only one has something not too
desperately antique to say, and this, by virtue of a work which I, at
any rate, have never seen quoted, and a paper in a certain Antipodean
organ, which for the majority of people here might as well be in the
_Faerie Queene_ or _Paradise Lost_, I think I may have. But first let us
turn to what, though it be antique, is also classical, and—though this
would not be a corollary for everyone—very delightful: “To look,” say
the authors of the famous _Introduction_, “at a locust in a cabinet of
insects, you would not, at first sight, deem it capable of being the
source of so much evil to mankind as stands on record against it. ‘This
is but a small creature,’ you would say, ‘and the mischief which it
causes cannot be far beyond the proportion of its bulk. The locusts so
celebrated in history must surely be of the Indian kind mentioned by
Pliny, which were three feet in length, with legs so strong that the
women used them as saws. I see, indeed, some resemblance to the horse’s
head, but where are the eyes of the elephant, the neck of the bull, the
horns of the stag, the chest of the lion, the belly of the scorpion, the
wings of the eagle, the thighs of the camel, the legs of the ostrich,
and the tail of the serpent, all of which the Arabians mention as
attributes of this widely dreaded insect destroyer, but of which, in the
insect before me, I discern little or no likeness?’” Personally, I do
not for a moment imagine that even in 1815, the date of the first
edition of the work in question, any reasonably educated person would
have spoken or thought in this way, without any conception, apparently,
of what numbers can effect, but it is interesting to know what the Arabs
think, or say, about the locust, and especially that they represent
it—as we are told a few lines on—as thus addressing Mahomet: “We are the
army of the Great God; we produce ninety-nine eggs; if the hundred were
completed, we should consume the whole earth and all that is in it.”

The authors then proceed to give a short résumé of the various locust
plagues under which the earth, over a large part of its surface, has at
different times groaned. The first and best authenticated goes back to a
very early period—about 4000 B.C.—after which the evidence does not
conform quite so strictly to the test demanded of it by the modern
scientific spirit. Pliny, however, we are told, “mentions a law in
Cyrenaica by which the inhabitants were enjoined to destroy the locusts
in three different states, three times in the year—first their eggs,
then their young, and lastly the perfect insect. And not without reason
was such a law enacted; for Orosius tells us that in the year of the
world 3800 Africa was infested by such infinite myriads of these animals
that having devoured every green thing, after flying off to sea they
were drowned, and being cast upon the shore, they emitted a stench
greater than could have been produced by the carcases of 100,000 men (a
very confident statement, surely). St. Augustine also mentions a plague
as having arisen in that country from the same cause, which destroyed no
less than 800,000 persons (_octingenta_ _hominum millia_) in the kingdom
of Masanissa alone, and many more in the territories bordering upon the
sea.” After this we make a jump to A.D. 591, and find the locusts in
Europe. In that year “an infinite army of them, of a size unusually
large, grievously ravaged part of Italy; and, being at last cast into
the sea, from their stench arose a pestilence which carried off near a
million of men and beasts. In the Venetian territory also, in 1478, more
than 30,000 persons” (but this seems pitiful) “are said to have perished
in a famine occasioned by these terrific scourges.”

Many other instances of their devastations in Europe, in France, Spain,
Italy, Germany, etc., are recorded by the same authors. “In 1650 a cloud
of them was seen to enter Russia in three different places, which from
thence passed over into Poland and Lithuania, where the air was darkened
by their numbers. In some places they were seen lying dead, heaped one
upon another to the depth of four feet; in others they covered the
surface, like a black cloth, the trees bent with their weight, and the
damage they did exceeded all computation.” Nay, “even this happy island
(_lucus a non lucendo_), so remarkably distinguished by its exemption
from most of those scourges to which other nations are exposed (as fog,
sunshine, etc.), was once alarmed by the appearance of locusts. In 1748
they were observed here in considerable numbers, but providentially they
soon perished without propagating”—the “happy island” apparently having
been too much for them. These unfortunates would appear to have been
stragglers from far vaster numbers which a year before had devastated
Eastern Europe, one swarm of which, “entering Transylvania in August,
was several hundred fathoms in width. At Vienna the breadth of one of
them was three miles, and extended to so great a length as to be four
hours in passing over the Red Tower: and such was its density that it
totally intercepted the solar light, so that when they flew low one
person could not see another at the distance of twenty paces.” Another
host that appeared in India is said to have formed a column five hundred
miles long, and “so compact was it when on the wing that, like an
eclipse, it completely hid the sun, so that no shadow was cast by any
object, and some lofty tombs not more than 200 yards off were rendered
quite invisible.”

Dr. Clarke in his _Travels_ speaks of locusts covering “his carriage and
horses, and says the Tartars assert that people are sometimes suffocated
by them.” He mentions two species, “the first of which is almost twice
the size of the second, and, because it precedes it, is called by the
Tartars the herald or messenger.” From 1778 to 1780 a dreadful curse of
locusts, alluded to by Southey in his “Thalaba”—or, perhaps, forming the
subject of that poem—I really don’t know—fell upon the Empire of
Morocco. “Everything green was eaten up, not even the bitter bark of the
orange and pomegranate escaping. A most dreadful famine ensued. The poor
were seen to wander over the country deriving a miserable subsistence
from the roots of plants; and women and children followed the camels,
from whose dung they picked the undigested grains of barley, which they
devoured with avidity; in consequence of which numbers perished, and the
roads and streets exhibited the unburied carcases of the dead.” Again,
“From Mogador to Tangier, before the plague of 1799, the face of the
earth was covered by them. At that time a singular incident occurred at
El Araiche. The whole region from the confines of the Sahara was ravaged
by them; but on the other side of the river, El Kos, not one was to be
seen, though there was nothing to prevent their flying over it. Till
then they had proceeded northwards; but upon arriving at its banks they
turned to the east, so that all the country north of El Araiche was full
of pulse, fruits, and grain—exhibiting a most striking contrast to the
desolation of the adjoining district.” Lastly—that is to say, to make a
last quotation from the classics—“The Arabs of the Desert, whose hands
are against every man, and who rejoice in the evil that befalls other
nations, when they behold the clouds of locusts proceeding from the
north, are filled with gladness, anticipating a general mortality, which
they call _El Khere_ (the benediction), for when a country is thus laid
waste they emerge from their arid deserts and pitch their tents in the
desolated plains.”

Darwin, in his _Journal of Researches_, gives the following account of a
flight of locusts: “Shortly before we arrived at the village of Luxan we
observed to the south a ragged cloud of a dark reddish-brown colour. At
first we thought that it was smoke from some great fire on the plains;
but we soon found that it was a swarm of locusts. They were flying
northward, and with the aid of a slight breeze they overtook us at a
rate of ten or fifteen miles an hour. The main body filled the air from
a height of twenty feet to that, as it appeared, of two or three
thousand above the ground; ‘and the sound of their wings was as the
sound of chariots of many horses running to battle,’ or rather, I should
say, like a strong breeze passing through the rigging of a ship. The
sky, seen through the advanced guard, appeared like a mezzotinto
engraving, but the main body was impervious to sight; they were not,
however, so thick together but that they could escape a stick waved
backwards and forwards. When they alighted, they were more numerous than
the leaves in the field, and the surface became reddish instead of being
green: the swarm having once alighted, the individuals flew from side to
side in all directions.” At that time—the year was 1835—locusts were
“not an uncommon pest in this country: already during this season
several smaller swarms had come up from the south, where, as,
apparently, in all other parts of the world, they are bred in the
deserts. The poor cottagers in vain attempted by lighting fires, by
shouts, and by waving branches to avert the attack.” This locust, Darwin
tells us, closely resembled the famous _Gryllus migratorius_ of the
East—the one that spoke to the Prophet—if, indeed, it was not identical
with it.

Though these accounts are all interesting in their way, they none of
them tell us much—or, indeed, anything—about the locusts themselves, for
which reason I will supplement them with some which have that advantage,
and are also, in some sort, a check or commentary upon the others. It is
to be noted that, in all these, we hear only of flying locusts, and
anyone would imagine by reading of them that it was by such, and no
others, that all the damage was done. In Africa, however, and also in
Cyprus—from which we may assume that it is the same elsewhere—the case
is widely different. Writing evidently as a locust expert of the former
country, Dr. Æneas Munro tells us that it is in their early wingless
state—answering to the caterpillar one, though far less differentiated
from the perfect form—that the most terrible, the overwhelming, injury
is inflicted by these insects. Of the full-grown flying locusts he says,
“To a certain extent, they do injure here and there, where they select
to settle and feed; but they do not devour everything clean before them,
like the army of the larval stage or jumpers.”[18] Of the latter and its
doings _ab ovo_ we have the following interesting account: “When the
tiny creatures issue from their nest they are of a greenish white or
creamy colour, about an eighth of an inch in length,” and on the day
that they do so “the very dust of the ground, which was so still before,
now seems to waken into life. They begin to move by a process of
twisting or rolling over one another, so that, for the first few days,
they receive the name of twisters. Within eight or ten days, however,
they can jump four or six inches, and at the age of three or four weeks
a new characteristic makes its appearance. A desire to explore manifests
itself, and in a surprising manner. The whole company moves in a body in
one general direction, and more or less in a straight line, as if by one
common instinct, without apparently having any recognised leader or
commander,”[18] which is just the way, in my opinion, that rooks and
starlings move.[19]

Marching in this way they spread themselves out over the country,
“eating everything that comes in their way—wheat (if sufficiently young
and tender), maize (even if strong and old), corn, sugar-cane, linseed,
alfalfa (lucerne), pasture of all kinds, vegetables of all kinds
(tomatoes and celery), and all garden produce, potatoes (ordinary and
sweet), the leaves and sometimes even the bark of the trees, causing
their ruin. The fruit, of course, is lost for the season. Orange,
willow, poplar, palm, banana, peach, pear, plum, vine, acacia, roses,
etc., are stripped,” but not “the gum and paradise trees, which seem to
be poisonous to them. They make everything ‘clean bare’; sometimes they
will enter houses, and eat the very clothes and curtains at the
windows.”[20] They will even eat the wool off the backs of the sheep,
and “last stage of all that ends this strange, eventful history,” on a
pressing occasion they will eat one another. Continuing his interesting
account—the graphic and convincing one of an eye-witness— Dr. Munro
tells us that “when these hoppers and jumpers (_voetgangers_, as the
Boers call them) are on the march, they sometimes appear so determined
and bent on the fearful execution of their work, that they resemble and
have got the name of ‘an army on the march.’ They move in open file, and
carry themselves in a proud, haughty way, with heads high up and fixed.
It is beautiful and interesting to see them on the march, if we only
divest ourselves for the moment of the idea of their devastating
object.”[20] And again, “The whole of the company begin to walk at the
same time, as if by order; the head is kept erect, and the neck is as if
stiffened. They go straight on, irrespective of danger,”[20] and are
deterred, as is well known, by hardly any obstacle. “The sight of this
army is a very impressive one, and once seen will never be forgotten. In
some respects it is an awful sight; the spectacle strikes you with pity
and sorrow to see at once before you that the toil and the labour for
the season, or, indeed, the year, is lost.”[20]

“It is in this marching stage,” continues Dr. Munro, “that the
_voetgangers_ do enormous damage and eat every edible thing in their
path, and completely destroy the work of the husbandman. They are not
content with levying toll merely, but they will have all, and will leave
nothing behind but desolation. They are therefore unlike the flying
company of locusts, which only levy toll here and there, but these, when
they pass, leave nothing.”

Some curious facts are then given in regard to the uniform
direction—varying according to the country—in which these wingless
locusts march. The account will be remembered of how a flying host came
to the banks of a river which they refrained from crossing. One might
almost think that a mistake had here been made, and that the locusts
were really _voetgangers_, but had they been so, the river, unless a
large one, need not have deterred them—at least, they will pass streams,
though doubtless great numbers are sacrificed in doing so. If, however,
the stream had run parallel to the direction in which the swarm was
advancing, we can understand, in the light of what seems to be now
established, their not crossing it.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              CHAPTER VII


    The sense of direction—How locusts look flying—Follow no
      leader—Unanimity of movement—Flight by moonlight—Roosting at
      night—Extirpated in Cyprus—The “Chinese Wall” system—Not
      adapted to Australia—Deference to aboriginal feeling—Locusts
      in Australia—Strange ceremony of egg-laying—Inadequate
      explanation.

IN regard to the faculty of direction with which locusts seem endowed,
Dr. Munro says: “The flying locusts in the Argentine come from a
northerly direction, and the hoppers or creepers march towards the
south, although it might be, so far as abundance of suitable food goes,
to their manifest advantage to go in an opposite direction. In certain
countries the direction may be known. In this country (South Africa) it
will be found that they march towards the south, and not towards the
north, east, or west, though either of these directions might have been
better for them. The direction may not be true south; it may incline at
one time to the south-east, at another to the south-west; but, taken as
a whole, it will be southwards.” And he adds: “If proof be needed that
the ‘_saltonas_,’ another name—perhaps the Portuguese one—for these
wingless armies, march in one direction, it is abundantly found in the
experience of the screen and trap, or Cypriote system of destroying
locusts, which is based on this fact, and on this alone. This is
conclusive demonstration.”[21]

The distance that these footgangers—to translate, almost without
changing, the Dutch word—go in a day depends upon the amount of food
they find upon the road, but fluctuates, as a rule, between one mile and
two. They start about eight o’clock, when the sun begins to get hot; and
halt for the night a little before the sun sets. Dr. Munro describes the
way in which the female locust, before laying her eggs, drills a hole in
the hard ground with the disc-like extremity of her abdomen, but he
mentions nothing very peculiar in connection with the laying of the eggs
such as characterises the performance of that ceremony by the Australian
plague locust, as will be mentioned shortly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The dark cloud is entirely composed of locusts, which
      sometimes fill the air from twenty feet to two or three
      thousand feet above the ground. The poor people attempt in
      vain, by shouts, by lighting fires, and waving branches, to
      avert the attack.

The first appearance of these locusts is in enormous hosts, which may
sometimes be seen at a distance of from seven to ten miles, and then
appear as a black cloud in the clear and rarefied air of South Africa.
“It is impossible,” says Dr. Munro, “to estimate the number of locusts
in these clouds, but some idea may be formed from the fact that when
they are driven, as sometimes is the case in a storm, into the sea, so
many are washed ashore that they lie on the beach as a bank from three
to four feet thick and from fifty to one hundred miles in length, and
the stench from the corruption of their bodies, it is affirmed, is
sensibly perceived for a hundred and fifty miles inland.”[22] The aerial
movements of the locusts, when they fairly surround one, are described
as “curious, interesting, and pretty.” Distant vision (more especially
overhead) is impeded on account of their numbers. The effect when you
look on them in the sun’s rays resembles “snow falling thickly and
gently,” and the sun is only seen as though it were in eclipse. “Its
light is darkened and shadows cannot then be cast from it.”[23] The
height at which the swarm flies may be anything between forty feet and
two miles from the ground, but as a rule it is not greater than 400
feet, though from 500 to 800 is not uncommon. Sometimes they fly by
moonlight, but this is not their usual practice. As in their earlier
wingless state, they seem to act by one common impulse, which prevents
confusion. It is obvious, indeed, that with such myriads filling the
whole air, a leader could neither be perceived nor followed, and from my
own observations I am convinced that the same difficulty applies to this
way of explaining the movements of flocks of birds. I have never,
myself, seen any evidence of birds being led by one or more of their
number, but much to convince me that when banded together, in numbers,
their movements are governed by a totally different principle, viz. that
of thought transference or thought-unity—collective thinking, as I have
elsewhere called it—for that is what it most suggests. If this is not
the case with locusts, what, I would ask, is the alternative
explanation? If great hosts of men be neither led nor of one mind where
to go, they must fall into confusion, impeding one another’s movements,
and this is a law which has to do with numbers merely, without respect
to the species of which they are composed. It has often been noticed,
however, that large crowds seem liable to be swayed suddenly by some
common impulse.

Locusts may fly about a district all day doing but little harm, “and at
sundown,” says Dr. Munro, “the sight becomes interesting beyond
description, for the whole company then appear to vie with one another
in order to roost quickly.”[23] When all have found a resting-place,
“every twig, branch, bush, or separate stalk of the corn or wheat or
flax are completely covered, and sometimes they stick to each
other”[23]—three or four deep even. “As far as the eye can see, the
surface assumes a brownish-red hue. Pillars, posts, or the walls of
houses are all alike to them at the time of roosting for the night.”[23]

Such, then, is the Plague Locust of South Africa, which is, when at
maturity, about three inches long. Some years ago, however—the exact
date is not given—a larger and handsomer species made its appearance,
and is thus referred to in a letter which was sent by “A Disgusted
Farmer” of Grahamstown to one of the South African papers: “The new red
locust, which, during the last month, has spread from the Orange River
to the sea, coming apparently from the north as well as from Natal, is
doing terrible damage. Everywhere fruit-trees are being
destroyed—quince, apricot, fig, orange, lemon, naartje trees. Not only
are the leaves eaten, but young branches are all barked, so that they
are probably killed. A splendid crop of mealies, covering the whole of
Peddie, Lower Albany, Alexandria, and other districts, has been entirely
destroyed. Pumpkin plants are being eaten too. Vegetables of all
kinds—lucerne, cattle-cabbage, and kale—are also swept away. The locusts
are laying everywhere, and, no doubt, the plague will continue some
years. What is the agricultural farmer to do?”[23] I do not know, but
here, probably, were there locusts, he would pick out all such birds as
fed on them and try to get them taken off the list of protected species,
shooting them illegally all the while he was petitioning.

Dr. Munro’s work was published in 1900, and its principal object was to
induce the South African Government to adopt the system of dealing with
the locust plague which had been practised with such entire success in
the isle of Cyprus. Whether this has since been done, and with what
results, I am unable to say. In Cyprus, however, the locusts, which from
the year 1600, especially, have changed the country from a garden into a
wilderness, were in one season almost entirely swept away. The method by
which so great a result was effected is the invention of an Italian
gentleman—Signor Matthei by name—resident in the island, and is based
upon the inability of the immature locusts, the footgangers—probably the
grown ones too, but this is immaterial—to crawl up a smooth
perpendicular, still more an overhanging surface. Such a surface was
supplied by a long band of leather, glazed and polished, surmounting a
strip of calico, which was made about four feet high, but need not, as
it was afterwards found, have been more than two. This insurmountable
obstacle, supported at intervals by sticks set in the ground—not
upright, but slanting a little towards the path of the locusts—was set
up over a large area of country like a miniature Chinese Wall, and
proved even more insurmountable. At intervals along the inner side of
the barrier deep pits were dug, whilst at wider ones stood men provided
with brooms, spades, brushwood, and all else requisite. When the locusts
arrived at the Chinese Wall they climbed up the canvas part of it, but
being unable to pass the smooth band of leather they fell down in heaps,
and their ever-increasing multitudes soon filled the pits, in which they
were buried, burnt, stamped down, or otherwise provided for. Afterwards
their carcases were dug out and heaped on carts, and the pits, being
empty again, were ready for more. In this way two hundred million
quadrillion billions—or something of that sort—of locusts were
destroyed, and next year when everything was again ready for them hardly
any appeared. By this invention, as simple as it is ingenious and
inexpensive, the locust plague in Cyprus has become a thing of the past,
and if the conferrer of so great a benefit was ever not a man of large
fortune, let us hope that that has become a thing of the past, too, for
he must have saved several to the British Government. If the locusts,
after coming to the Chinese Wall and finding themselves unable to climb
it, had turned round and walked in another direction, this would have
made a capital instance of intelligence shown by insects—but they did
not do so.

With native labour, the above system, which has been so entirely
successful in Cyprus, could, Dr. Munro makes no doubt, be put in
operation in Africa; but Mr. W. W. Froggatt, the Government entomologist
of Australia, does not think it adapted for that country. Writing in
_The Agricultural Gazette_ of New South Wales (March, 1901), Mr.
Froggatt says, “Though they have been successfully dealt with in Cyprus,
Egypt, Algeria, and India by means of trenches, traps, and burning in
the hopper state, and digging up and destroying the eggs in the earlier
stage, in nearly all cases the areas infested were comparatively small;
the labour employed was so cheap that small armies of natives could be
employed at a small cost to destroy them, while in several instances an
autocratic government made the natives, whether they were inclined or
not, work at their plan of destruction.” In Australia, where, “whether
they were inclined or not,” the natives have been got rid of, very much
as though they were locusts—or some less stubborn insects—themselves,
this would not do.

It was in the summer of 1899 that Mr. Froggatt, in consequence of
reports received of the advent of locusts in various parts of the
country, left Sydney for Condobolin. On the way there many “mobs”—to use
the Australian word—were encountered, and numbers of locusts flew in at
the railway carriage windows. Upon alighting, Mr. Froggatt became the
witness of a very interesting spectacle—a ceremony, as it may well be
called, in which vast numbers of the insects were engaged—of which he
gives the following description:—

“In the open red soil we found them laying their eggs in thousands, and
the operation was very remarkable. The female set to work by pressing
the tip of her abdomen into the soil, and working the plates at the
apex, so that she gradually bored a regular circular shaft, slightly
over an inch in depth and under a quarter of an inch in diameter, the
segments of the abdomen extending and stretching as the work progressed.
But the most extraordinary part of the operation was that each female,
while boring the chamber to deposit the eggs, was attended by two males,
each of which rested his head against hers, with his antennas resting
over her head, and the inner foreleg clasped over the prothorax behind
the base of the head. Resting like this, with the tails of the two
attendant males pointing outwards, the three formed a three-rayed star.
Wherever the business of egg-laying was going on, each female and her
attendants were surrounded by a cluster of admiring males, averaging
from thirty to fifty in number, generally in bunches of fours or fives,
forming an irregular ring round them, but separated from her by a clear
space of three or four inches. In no instance were there ever more than
two males touching the female, though we examined thousands of them at
work.”[24]

What is the meaning of this odd performance?—this ceremony, as it
appears to me, though Mr. Froggatt takes a utilitarian view of it. “The
probable and only reason,” he remarks, “that I can see for the
attendance of the two males upon the egg-laying female is that it
enables her to get a firmer grip of the ground, and, in fact, holds her
in position till she completes her task.”[24] But why, then, should the
females of no other species of locust, as far as we are aware, require
this aid, and should not the soil of Africa be as hard as that of
Australia? “I can find,” says Mr. Froggatt, “no record of this habit in
any of our described species, which have the same habits.”[24] Again,
besides the two chief actors, we have the admiring ring of from thirty
to fifty males, who can be of no possible service, but whose conduct
shows that they take a strong interest in what the female is doing. What
is it, too, that regulates the number, or, at any rate, the personality
of the assistant males? If it is a matter of rendering assistance only,
and the two males who do so are bound to the female by no more special
tie than the crowd of interested spectators, why do not these, or some
of them, push forward? Why is there never any contention between them?
These considerations make me think that there is something of a formal
and ceremonious character about these queer proceedings, and that they
are governed by the same general law as are certain antics or set
figures amongst birds, wherein three individuals take a part. What one
requires to know is the courting and marital relations of the male and
female locust before the egg-laying takes place.

These little locusts—_Epacromia terminalis_ is the specific name—are
only about an inch in length, and the male, from the description, seems
a little brighter than the female, which may be due to sexual selection.
The female appears to lay nineteen eggs only, neither more nor less,
which is not so many as one would have expected from the Arabian legend.
With some other species, however, the number more conforms to the
statement said to have been made to Mahomet.

There is no vanity at all in my thinking that this has been an
interesting account of locusts, since I myself have had nothing to do
with it. In giving a general description, from general reading, of
things generally known, and that have been described scores of times
before, one is entitled to use one’s own language, and to think,
perhaps, that one stands at no particular disadvantage in doing so. But
when, in regard to something specially curious or interesting, the
graphic words of an eye-witness are before one, the best thing one can
do, in my opinion, is to copy them out. If it be suggested that this is
but a lazy way of writing a book, my reply is that a compiler best shows
his industry in the searching out of material. The late Professor
Romanes was alive to this fact, and has left us in consequence his
_Animal Intelligence_—one of the most interesting books that exist, in
my opinion—about one-eighth of which, or perhaps a little more, is
written by himself.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER VIII


    Locusts and _locustidæ_—The most musical grasshoppers—Katydid
      concerts—A much-resembling note—Cricket thermometers—Cicadas
      and sounding-boards—Admired musicians—An appreciative
      audience.

LOCUSTS, as everybody knows, belong to the grasshopper family, but it
may surprise some who have read the grumblings of the learned over
popular names—white ants, hedge-sparrows, etc.—to find that
entomologists have so managed matters that they do not belong to the
_locustidæ_—which is one of the two groups into which all grasshoppers
are divided—but to the other group. There are long-horned grasshoppers
and short-horned grasshoppers. The long-horned ones, which are not
locusts, are all of them _locustidæ_, but none of the _locustidæ_ are
locusts, because locusts have short horns. Entomologists think it would
be absurd to alter this, after it has gone on so long, a view in which
ornithologists, with their _storm_-petrels and hedge-_accentors_, no
doubt agree with them. A mere popular name, with its roots in the Saxon
or Celtic, can be changed, and there an end, but scientific nonsense, in
Latin, and begun by Linnæus, as is generally the case, let no man
presume to meddle with.

It is amongst the _locustidæ_ that we find the most musical of the
grasshoppers, the Katydids—so well known and highly appreciated in the
United States—standing on a far higher level in this respect than the
comparatively unmusical locusts. Not that the _locustidæ_—however
musical—use their long horns for blowing purposes. Properly speaking,
these are only antennæ, and function as such, the musical apparatus
being situated elsewhere. The Katydids, for instance, rasp their fore
wings against each other, according to the general idea, three times in
succession, producing the three syllables, Ka—ty—did, which have given
the insect its name, but according to Mr. Scudder[25] only twice, which
makes either “Katy,” or “She did”; that is to say, as a general rule,
for he admits the three on occasions. The notes are uttered with great
emphasis, and at the rate of some two hundred in the minute, the
performance continuing, at least in the case of some species, all day
and all night long.

A number of grasshoppers go by the name of Katydids in America, but the
general type of the insect is a graceful, green, fragile-looking
creature, with very long, slender antennæ, and, in the female, a long
ovipositor at the other end, as if to balance matters. There are many
species, and all, or most of them, sing both by night and day, and what
is very remarkable, or, at least, very interesting, they have a
different note for either. Speaking of one—or, rather, of a long-horned
grasshopper nearly related to the Katydids, but not actually a member of
the sisterhood—which he had been watching in the sunshine, Mr. Scudder
says: “As a cloud passed over the sun he suddenly changed his note to
one with which I was already familiar, but without knowing to what
insect it belonged. At the same time, all the individuals around, whose
similar day-song I had heard, began to respond with the night-cry. The
cloud passed away, and the original note was resumed on all sides.”[26]
_Scudderia angustifolia_ is the name of this little musician, so called,
perhaps, because so sensitive to scudding clouds. But the Katydids do
more than merely play an individual tune, each on his own instrument.
They hold concerts, at which many join together to make an elaborate
musical display, a certain number commencing on one note, and others
joining in harmoniously on another. There are leaders, whose business it
is to hold the time-measure, and, by a steady insistence on the right
note, to draw back any who may happen for a moment to get out of tune.
The orchestra is divided into so many companies, who support and assist
one another, so that the whole makes a concerted harmony, in which there
are many different movements. As a rule the performance is most
creditable, though occasionally the effect is marred by a careless
player. Before commencing, the company always tunes up.

Possibly it may be thought that there is some mistake here—that things
cannot be quite like this. Personally I have no knowledge on the
subject—never having been to America—but here is what Dr. George M.
Gould says, writing in _Science_ for October or November, probably 1895,
since the number is referred to as “recent” in _Nature_ for December 5th
of that year. “As soon as the sun has set and twilight is advancing, the
Katydids in the trees begin to ‘tune up.’ The first notes are scattered,
awkward and without rhythm, but if no wind is blowing thousands soon
join in, and from time to time, until daylight breaks, there is no
intermission.... In order to make my description clearer, let us suppose
a thousand Katydids, scattered through the trees, to utter their several
notes all at once, and call them Company A. Another thousand—Company
B—at once answers them, and this swing-swong is kept up, as I say, all
night. Company A’s note is the emphatic or accented note, and is more
definitely and accurately a precise musical note, whilst the note of
Company B varies from one to five half-tones below, the most conspicuous
note being five. In the old-fashioned musical terms I learned as a boy,
Company A is, e.g., clearly and definitely _do_, while the note of
Company B is either _la_, or more certainly _sol_. Not only is Company
A’s note more unisonal and definite, but it is firmer, more accented,
and it seems to me that more insects join in this note than in the
second. Careful observation has convinced me that no insect of Company A
or Company B ever joins in the other company’s note. The rhythm is
usually perfect, unless there is a disturbance by a breeze. A sharp gust
upsets the whole orchestra, and confusion results, but the measured beat
is soon refound. In the instants of confusion one can detect the steady
see-saw of certain ones, as it were, ‘leaders,’ or first violinists, who
hold the time-measure, despite the wind, and who soon draw the lost
notes of the others once more into the regular measure or beat. I do not
mean to say that by diligent attention one may not at times detect
individuals sawing out of tune, stray fellows that are indifferent or
careless, but the vast majority, usually even without a single
exception, if there is no wind or rain, thus swing along, hour after
hour, in perfect time. I have counted the beats several times, and find
the number is always identical: thirty-four double beats, or sixty-eight
single ones, in sixty seconds. The effect of the rhythm upon the mind is
not unlike that of the woodman’s cross-cut saw, handled by two steady,
tireless pairs of hands, although the Katydids give a larger volume of
sound, and the _timbre_ is harsher.” Such is the account, and upon it
Dr. Gould asks two questions: “What function does the orchestration
subserve?” and “Is there anything comparable to it among other animals?”

In view of these performances of the Katydids one may perhaps question
the statement, often made, that crickets are _the_ most musical of all
insects. The Snowy Cricket, however, of the United States, and no doubt
elsewhere in America, is a very striking performer, especially at night,
when it emits sounds which Nathaniel Hawthorne has likened to “audible
stillness,” and of which he says: “If moonlight could be heard it would
sound like that.” Thoreau describes it as a “slumbrous breathing,” but
according to the State Entomologist of the United States, this
“slumbrous breathing,” or “audible stillness,” consists of “a shrill
re-teat, re-teat, re-teat,” which Mr. Leland Howard,[26] indeed, thinks
the best description, but is not quite my idea—nor probably
Hawthorne’s—of how moonlight would sound. Harrington—who I suppose is
another entomologist—does not interfere with any of these opinions, but
describes something which he has seen, and can find nothing about in
books. “While the male,” he says, “is energetically shuffling together
his wings, raised almost vertically, the female may be seen standing
just behind him, and with her head applied to the base of the wings,
evidently eager to get the full benefit of every note produced.”[26] No
doubt the female likes the notes—that, indeed, is the _rationale_ of
their utterance—but what they are really like it is impossible to make
out from these various descriptions, another of which, by the way, is “a
rhythmic beat.” Possibly they are no more extraordinary (at any rate,
“re-teat” is not) than those of our own, and cheerful, house-cricket,
which to my ear have always sounded very pretty, but which Cowper
evidently did not care about except as a matter of association, since he
thus alludes to them in the _Task_:—

          “Sounds inharmonious in themselves and harsh,
           Yet heard in scenes where peace for ever (sic) reigns,
           And only there, please highly for their sake.”

No doubt there are associations, though these, belonging to the kitchen,
appear to me to be of another and blither description, but the “sounds”
themselves, in my opinion, are neither harsh nor inharmonious, as far as
any unpleasantness to the ear is conveyed by the last word.

One interesting point about the song of crickets is that the number of
notes uttered in any given space of time—per minute, say—varies
according to the temperature, the two rising together. Professor
Dolbeare was the first, as far as I know, to call attention to this
fact, and he is thus confirmed by a lady: “One cool evening a cricket
was caught and brought into a warm room. In a few minutes it began to
chirp nearly twice as rapidly as the out-of-door crickets. Its rate very
nearly conformed to the observed rate maintained on other evenings under
the same temperature conditions (as now indoors). From this series of
observations we found that the rate of chirping was, as Professor
Dolbeare says, very closely dependent on the temperature.”[27] So the
crickets are little thermometers—sixty-three degrees Fahrenheit to one
hundred chirps per minute.

As we have seen, the Katydids give concerts, and we may therefore infer
that they like their own music in a musically appreciative way; that
they listen to each other as critical connoisseurs, whether they have
other feelings or not, and that it is not a mere matter of the female
alone admiring the sounds made by the male, just because _he_ makes
them. In all this, however, the admiration is confined—at least, as far
as we know—to one species—that to which the musician belongs. Katydids
appreciate the performances of Katydids. But there is one group of
performers whose music gives satisfaction, not merely to individuals of
other species than their own, but to such as are not even included in
the same order with them, so that racial pride or family prejudice
cannot be the reason of it. Towards these stars we will now turn our
gaze.

All who have lived in the more southern parts of the world, including
the southern countries of Europe, must have made the acquaintance of the
cicadas, for in these regions they are large insects, conspicuous by
their appearance when once seen, and by their song long before they are
noticed. There is something very uncouth—one might almost say
grotesquely humorous—yet at the same time pleasing and lovable about the
broad flat heads and great goggle eyes of these insects, in the which it
is easy to imagine some quaint sort of expression that seems to mean or
suggest something for which the language supplies no word. Their wings,
both long and broad, which, when folded, project far beyond the
extremity of the abdomen, concealing everything save the great head and
the wide shield or boss of the thorax, help also in giving them a most
salient and characteristic appearance, and make them look more aerial
than they really are. Their legs, whilst they retain their ordinary
resting attitude, are entirely hidden, and so too are the organs of the
mouth, which combine to make a sharp-pointed beak. Thus their appearance
is typical of air and sunshine, and anything so gross as mere feeding or
terrestrial locomotion seems foreign to their nature. The ancients, who
loved and admired the cicadas extremely, thinking them the most
fortunate of creatures, supposed that they lived entirely on dew.

                    “Oh Tettix, drunk with sipping dew,
                     What musician equals you?”

sings Anacreon, or someone who imitated him and wrote very gracefully,
for Tettix was a common Greek name for the cicada. Really they live on
the sap of the trees on which they sit, and there may even be two
opinions about their music. To me it is pleasant enough—full of the joy
of the sunshine, as it were, and its loudness and the continuous way in
which it goes on excites one’s wonder. In regard to the way in which it
is produced, Darwin says, at page 351 of his immortal work, _The Descent
of Man_: “The sound, according to Laudois, who has recently studied the
subject, is produced by the vibration of the lips of the spiracles,
which are set in motion by a current of air emitted by the tracheæ. It
is increased by a wonderfully complex resounding apparatus, consisting
of two cavities covered with scales. Hence the sound may truly be called
a voice. In the female the musical apparatus is present, but very much
less developed than in the male, and is never used for producing sound.”
As the Greeks, who must have had their observers, used to say—

                   “Happy the cicadas’ lives,
                    Since they all have voiceless wives.”

This sounds all right—I mean the account of the apparatus—but according
to Dr. Powell, of New Zealand, it is all wrong. Writing in the
_Transactions of the New Zealand Institute_,[28] Dr. Powell, after
quoting the above passage, says, “I am, of course, ignorant of the
details of his description; but unless the cicada which he describes
differs essentially in the nature of its musical organs from those found
in New Zealand, and also from those described more or less correctly by
other authors, especially Réaumur, he is most certainly in error.” Dr.
Powell, then, after telling us that the stridulating organs of the
cicada are constructed on a principle unique in nature, viz. a vibrating
membrane, continues: “In the male, on the upper surface of the first
ring of the abdomen, on either side, may be seen a crescent-shaped
opening, and on examining this opening with a magnifying-glass it will
be seen to lead into a shallow cavity, closed in by a horny membrane.
This membrane is highly elastic, and the sound is produced by the
contraction of the muscle straightening out the folds of the membrane;
this produces a click and, on the muscle relaxing, the membrane, from
its elasticity, springs back with another click.” That this is really
the way in which the sounds are produced seems proved by the fact that
“if a live insect be caught, and these membranes be observed during the
act of stridulation, they will be seen to be vibrating rapidly in time
with the beats of the shrill sound.”

But what about the “wonderfully complex resounding apparatus, consisting
of two cavities covered with scales”? After a full examination and
various experiments, Dr. Powell arrives at the unexpected conclusion
that the sound is in no way dependent upon these “large transparent,
drum-like membranes,” as he calls the cavities in question. I was “much
surprised,” he says, “to find that the large drums seemed to take no
part in the production of the sound, and the idea occurred to me that
they might be hearing organs; but on examining the females, which are
dumb and do not possess the stridulating organs, I found that the drums
exist, indeed, but are quite rudimentary instead of being large, as we
should expect to find them, were they subservient to the sense of
hearing.” If, however, the drums did answer the purpose of a resounding
apparatus in the male, we should expect to find them exactly as they are
in the female, and so strong does the evidence of their suppression in
her appear to me, that I cannot help thinking that, in spite of all Dr.
Powell’s observations and experiments, he was somehow mistaken, and that
in nature they do act in this way.

As to the quality of the sound produced by the cicada—of its song, as we
may call it—this varies greatly in the different species, for there are
many cicadas. Speaking of that of the largest—the great _Pomponia
imperatoria_ of Borneo—as big as a mouse, one may almost say, Mr.
Annandale remarks, “The sound produced by this species is, at the
beginning of the song, like the winding up of a large clock, and ends by
being comparable to the notes of a penny whistle. Between these extremes
it rises in a series of trills, each of which concludes with a kind of
click. Each section of the song is faster, louder, and clearer than the
one which preceded it, until, almost five minutes after the cicada’s
settling, the noise suddenly comes to an end as the insect flies off to
another tree, where it commences again.”[29] This great pompous imperial
insect—to give it a free rendering of its Latin name—sits shrouded in
the mysteries of the deeper jungle, while smaller and less majestic
babblers haunt its skirtings and the village groves. “Another species,
commonly heard at night in the jungle, has a clear, loud, clarion-like
call, which can be heard for a great distance.”[29]

Of the three New Zealand species of cicada—or those found in
Canterbury—a large and small green, and a black one, the two first, Dr.
Powell tells us, say “crrrk-crrrk-crrrk,” the second “r-r-r-r-r-r,” and
the third “crrrk-rrrrr,” _ad infinitum_. “Many persons,” he adds, “are
totally unable to hear the voice of the small green cicada, or any very
acute sounds, and inasmuch as the entire range of the human ear is,
according to Helmholtz, eleven octaves, it has been justly remarked that
the air may be filled with shrill insect sounds, which may be perfectly
audible to the insects themselves, but absolutely inaudible to our
grosser senses.”[30]

It is in Natal—at least, the fact has been observed there—that the
cicadas, as they sing, are listened to by admiring groups of other
insects. These appear to be beautiful creatures, having wings of a
soft, gauzy texture, but iridescent, and shot with the colours of the
rainbow. A band of these radiant attendants, consisting sometimes of a
dozen or fifteen, fly to the tree where a cicada is sitting and
arrange themselves in a semicircle around it, facing its head. They
are “all ear” evidently, and, as the sweet sounds continue, one or
other of the listeners will advance and touch the antennæ or legs of
the object of its admiration. Such marks of appreciation, however,
though flattering in proportion to their undoubted sincerity, are not
to the taste of the cicada, who will sometimes, whilst in the midst of
its song, strike out vigorously with a foot or so—for, of course, it
has six—causing its too obtrusive admirers to retreat to a more
respectful distance, where they continue to listen with every sign of
being extremely pleased.[31] Some years ago we did not even know the
name of these musical-connoisseur-like, and withal very beautiful
insects, but now they have been identified by Mr. Kirby, at the
British Museum, as _Nothochrysa gigantea_, so we are all much the
wiser, and have a weight lifted from our minds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER IX


    A Greek mistake—Nature vindicated—Cicadas provided for—A
      difficult feat—Perseverance rewarded—Cicadas in story—Dear
      to Apollo—Men before the Muses—Plato and Socrates—Athenian
      views—A mausoleum for pets—The Greek ploughman—Apollo’s
      judgment—Hercules’ bad taste—Modern survivals—A beneficent
      insect—Elementary education in Tuscany.

THE Greeks thought that the life of the cicadas was all joy, but modern
research has been successful in removing the reproach of inconsistency
from the general scheme of creation. All is in order, as it now appears:
the cicada’s case has been considered, and a very handsome wasp provided
for it. At least, I think it is handsome. It is large and strong, I
know, as is necessary for the part it has to perform, but I cannot quite
remember the colours it flies under; an expression which, though
metaphorical, may be pardoned, since flags have much to do with such
dramas as that now to be described. For as the joyous, sun-loving
creature sits in its accustomed place, chirupping forth those shrill yet
musical notes which I, at least, have never wearied of, the destroyer is
at hand, and settling on its broad back, curves its abdomen beneath that
of the poor blithe singer, and in a moment has done its work. As the
sting enters, the happy note that has been sounding regularly for the
last hour, perhaps, is changed to a discordant scream of pain, and with
a spasmodic spring or flutter—the last, or near the last, that it will
ever make—the cicada, with the wasp still clinging to it, falls to the
ground. This is awkward for the wasp, who doubtless considers herself
aggrieved in the matter, since the cicada is so bulky that, powerful as
she is, she can neither lift it from the ground in flight, nor is she
prepared to drag it all the way to her burrow. What, then, is she to do,
or of what use to her is the prize she has obtained with such
adroitness? But she has her plan, and though the captious behaviour of
the cicada has, for the moment, a little deranged it, it is not
permanently frustrated. Slowly, but with firm insistence, she drags her
victim to the tree on which a moment before it was so happily seated,
and then exerting all her force, begins to mount the trunk with it.
Often she has to pause and rest, often it seems as though the task would
be beyond her, but she continues the laborious ascent, sometimes for
upwards of an hour, until at last a height has been reached at which it
is possible for her to put her great project into execution. This is no
other than to fly down obliquely, with her victim clasped in her arms,
to the pleasant little sarcophagus which she has previously prepared for
it, for though flight upwards, or in a straight line, with such a
burden, is out of the question, her strength is equal to this. It is
necessary, however, that she should balance the body nicely, and make a
fair and uninterrupted start, in order not to be overweighted and again
fall. Her enterprise is “full of poise and difficult weight,” and cannot
be successfully carried out in face of the rude struggles of a tiresome
obstructive not “in tune with the infinite.” These struggles, however,
have now ceased; the cicada is in a comatose condition, and, having
adjusted it properly, and assumed the requisite attitude and position,
our wasp—whose scientific name, by the way, is _Sphecius
speciosus_—launches herself, with “the white man’s burden” she has
“taken up,” from her coign of vantage, and reaches home with it in
safety. How high she has previously ascended the tree I cannot say,
since my informant does not, but it would be interesting to ascertain
both this and the average distance which she has to fly to her nest, and
to compare the one with the other. Unless the latter is very much
greater than the former—and as the journey is constantly downwards it
cannot, one would think, be very far—then we must see in the wasp’s
choice of a toilsome ascent up a perpendicular tree-trunk, in preference
to a horizontal journey along the ground, a triumph of instinct over
intelligence, and it is, indeed, quite possible that, having always been
accustomed to fly back with her prize, which perhaps was not always so
heavy, she should go through as much labour to enable her to do this as,
differently directed, would attain the end for which it is employed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    After the wasp has killed the cicada, they both fall to the
      ground. Strong as the wasp is it is not easy for her to
      carry such a heavy insect to her nest. But she has her plan.
      Slowly but persistently she drags her victim to a tree-trunk
      and up it, though it may take her an hour to reach the
      requisite height. Then she sails off for her nest on an
      inclined plane, with wings extended, and her victim clasped
      in her arms.

The burrow of this wasp consists, we are told, “of a gently sloping
entrance, extending for about six inches, when, ordinarily, a turn is
made at right angles, and the excavation is continued for six or eight
inches farther, ending in a globular cell an inch and a half in
diameter. Frequently a number of branches leave the main burrow at about
the same point, each terminating in a round cell.”[32] In each of these
cells either one or two cicadas are deposited, and it would seem that
when there are two, only one of these is provided with an egg, so that
some of the wasp-larvæ have double rations. As the female _speciosus_
(her arguments, I think, would need to be specious to make one in love
with a scheme in which she plays such a part) is very much larger than
the male, it seems more than probable that the female eggs are laid in
the chambers which contain two cicadæ, and the male ones in those which
accommodate a single one only. If so, then these solitary wasps must
have the same control over the sex of the eggs laid by them as the queen
bee has. The social ones, should this be the case, no doubt have, too,
but as the former must have preceded the latter, it would appear that
this power has not been developed to meet the needs of a complex state
of society—as has been generally supposed—but in accordance with much
more simple conditions. The fact, however, if it be one, has not yet
been demonstrated.

“The delicate white, elongate egg of the wasp is laid under the middle
leg of the cicada, and when it hatches, the larva protrudes its head and
begins at once to draw nourishment from between the segments of its
victim. The egg hatches in two or three days, and the larva attains full
growth in a week, or a little more. It feeds entirely from the outside,
and, when full-grown, spins a white silken cocoon (mixed with much
earth, however), which is finished at the expiration of two days. It
remains in the cocoon, unchanged, through the winter, transforming to
pupa only in the following spring, and shortly before the appearance of
the true insect. When the adult hatches it gnaws its way out of the
cocoon, and so on up through the burrow to the surface of the ground,
thus completing its life-round in a full year.”[32] How long, exactly,
the life of the cicada lasts after it has entered into hospitable
relations with the _speciosus_ I am unable to say.

Such, then, is the end of the cicada, in spite of the love of Apollo,
who, according to the Anacreontic ode, bestowed upon it its shrill song.
Thus it dies, though “cherished by the Muses, painless and fleshless,
almost equal to the gods.” Whether it be fleshless _speciosus_, in the
larval state, best knows (on the latter point there will have been no
means of comparison), that it is painless one can only hope. It is
something, however, to be so known to fame. Homer himself alludes to the
cicada in terms of respect, calling its shrill song “delicate music,”
whilst Hesiod tells of “the dark-winged Tettix, when he begins to sing
to men of the coming summer; he whose meat and drink is of the
refreshing dew, and who all day long and at break of day pours forth his
voice.”

There was no end, apparently, to the love of the ancients—especially the
Greeks—for the cicadas, or tettiges—for they were known by both names—or
to the graceful things they said of them. From poets and philosophers
down to ploughmen, all were equally fond of them. “We bless thee,
Tettix,” says a poet whose name has been merged in that of one who is
now a name only, though a great one—Anacreon, namely—“We bless thee for
that seated on the tree-tops, sipping the dew, thou singest royally....
Oh, sweetest of summer prophets! honoured by mortals, thou art cherished
by the Muses. Phœbus himself loves thee, and gave thee thy shrill song”;
and Plato tells us that “as music soothes the mind and dissipates
fatigue, so the ploughman loves and cherishes the cicada for its song.”
The Greek ploughman, apparently, was a less gross embodiment than the
one of the present day, after twenty-five centuries or so of
improvement. To Apollo the cicadas were sacred, because they
“everlastingly sang to the sun,”[33] and, for the Muses, they had once
supplied their place. “As the story goes,” says Plato, “before the Muses
lived the cicadas were men on earth, and so loved song and singing that,
to lose no time from it, they left off eating, and so died of that dear
delight. But, in death, they became cicadas, and this boon was granted
them by the Muses, lately born, that on earth they should eat no more,
but only sing until they died again, and that then they should return to
the Muses to tell them who, amongst mortals, loved and worshipped them
most.” “A lover of music like yourself,” says Socrates in the “Phædrus”
of Plato, addressing one of _his_ worshippers, “ought surely to have
heard this story of the cicadas, how they were once human beings, but
died through forgetting to eat. But now, dear to the Muses, they hunger
no more, thirst no more, but sing only, from their birth. And in heaven
they tell Terpsichore of the dancers, Erato of the lovers, Calliope,
eldest of the nine, and Urania, of those whose heart is in
philosophy—and thus they whisper to them all.”

So established were these and similar stories that, in Greece, a cicada
perched on a harp was often engraved upon gems as the symbol of the
Muses, and, were there a musical contest, one had only to settle on the
lyre or pipe of the competitor it favoured, for the prize to be
instantly adjudged to that one—since Apollo was then held to have
spoken. Only in the absence of such indication were other methods of
forming a conclusion resorted to. In common with other graceful
creatures, cicadas were often kept as pets by the Greeks, and that
mausoleums were sometimes raised to these favourites we know from the
following epigram of the poetess Anytie—written probably for the friend
it celebrates:—“For a grasshopper, a nightingale of the fields, and for
an oak-haunting cicada Myro has built one common tomb. There the maiden
sits and weeps for three pets, torn from her by unrelenting Hades.”

Amongst the Athenians the cicadas were looked upon as children of the
soil of Attica, and those only who, like them, had been born upon it,
were permitted to twist the golden tettix, or bodkin, amidst their
flowing locks, thus forming the knot in which they were accustomed to
wear them. This privileged bodkin received its name through being
surmounted with the head, in gold, of a cicada, or tettix, and the
wearers—or bearers—of these insignia—which were strictly forbidden to
strangers—were known for this reason as Tettigophori. They were most
proud of the distinction, and, indeed, as it showed them to be
Athenians, they had a somewhat better right to be than is common in such
cases. Yet, amidst all this praise, we meet, here and there, with a
dissentient note. Hercules, for instance, feeling inclined to sleep,
once, on the banks of the river, opposite where the town of Locris
stood, and not being able to, on account of the perpetual singing of the
cicadas, took it so seriously that he prayed to the gods to put a stop
to their disturbing him. The gods, with whom Hercules was always a
favourite, heard his prayer, and cicadas, from that time, ceased to sing
opposite Locris, though they swarmed all round about that town. Here it
seems just to be hinted that Hercules was not very fond of the cicadas’
song, and Virgil—but he was a Roman—has called it (_infandum!_) a
_creaking_ note. On the whole, however, when he mentions these insects,
he gives us a pleasing picture.

              “_Sole sub ardenti, resonant arbusta cicadis_,”

he sings; a line which seems bathed in sunlight, and makes one see the
green lizards too. On the whole I cannot help thinking that Virgil loved
the cicadas.

It is interesting to find that in modern Italy, generally, but
especially in Tuscany, the old ideas and legends in regard to the
cicadas have not yet died out. Still, according to the Tuscan peasant,
they were maids—not men—before the Muses, till Apollo, as a mark of his
favour, promoted them into insects. Now, however, but little distinction
seems to be drawn between cicadas and crickets, or grasshoppers, and,
indeed, this was to some extent the case in classical times—the three
often figuring together on ancient coins or rings. Amongst all of
these—and together they supply a number of species—the greatest
favourite with the Tuscan peasant of to-day—as perhaps it was in days
long gone by—is a beautiful grey-green grasshopper, which the Americans
would call a Katydid, but is, here, the cavalletta. This insect is
looked upon as the special patron of children, upon whom it has the
power of conferring musical and poetic genius, as well as more general
mental endowments. To perform this properly, however, it must enter the
room where its little favourite lies asleep, and this it seems often to
do. The mother, should she see it, has her own part to play in the
matter, which she does by tying the beneficent insect, by a long thread,
to the bed-post, and chanting the following verses, with the idea,
probably, that “then the charm is firm and good.”

                  “Cavalletta, good and fair,
                   You bring good fortune everywhere,
                   Then since into this house you’ve come,
                   Oh, bring good fortune to our home,
                   Unto me and everyone,
                   But bring it mostly to my son.
                   Cavalletta, this I pray,
                   Bring, and do not take away.
                   In life you were a lady, full
                   Of talent, good, and beautiful,
                   Let me pray, as this is true,
                   You’ll give my child some talent too.
                   And when you fly from east to west,
                   May you, in turn, be truly blest,
                   For though an insect form you bear,
                   You’re still a spirit good and fair.”
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER X


    Cicadas in England—A blower of bubbles—The prolific Aphis—A
      nice calculation—Scientific curiosity—Dragon-fly armies—The
      son of the south-west wind.

IT is generally understood that there are no cicadas or tettixes in
England, and this—with a reservation in favour of a single species
residing in the New Forest—is roundly asserted in various entomological
works of authority. Since, however, Mr. George Bowdler Buckton, F.R.S.,
has written a monograph of the British _Cicadæ_, or _Tettigidæ_, in two
volumes, each of which has a number of plates giving figures of the
various species, all with their Latin names, there would seem to be a
conflict of learned opinion; and I, for my part—since one of these
species has relations with a nice little parasite which I should like to
describe—am of opinion, after profound investigation and impartial
weighing of the evidence on both sides, that Mr. Buckton is right. What
strikes one at first sight as curious is that numbers of creatures, as
large sometimes as humble bees, or larger, and of very striking
appearance—often quite brilliantly coloured—should for so long have
escaped observation; for certainly one has never seen them oneself, and,
on making inquiries, one soon finds that nobody else has. But there is
an explanation of this seeming miracle, and that of a not very
satisfactory nature. One may have noticed, whilst going through the
plates, that in the neighbourhood of each striking figure there are two
little irrelevant-looking black lines, drawn soft and fine, very
unobtrusive, looking as though they wished to elude observation; and
gradually it begins to dawn upon you that these lines represent the real
size in linear measurement of the very salient, _outré_-looking creature
you are looking at. This, then, is the key to the mystery. England is
full of cicadas, but they are all so small that nobody can see them—at
least without taking some trouble. So our poets have been silent, our
philosophers have made no reflections, and our ploughmen, to this day,
are without a proper objective for those appreciative perceptions of
life around them which, if it only existed, there might be some evidence
of their possessing. Our aristocracy too, or old county families, have
never been able to “think gold of themselves,” as the saying is, on
account of their golden tettix-pins, though the feeling itself has not
been entirely denied them. In a word, our national character has been
uninfluenced by cicadas, and, on this, two questions arise: first—for it
is no use to start on an assumption—whether faults exist in it, and
then, if they do, whether all or any of them are due to this cause. But
such matters are for the historian to deal with, and would be out of
place in the pages of a work like this.

Though cicadas are so small in England—whilst their voices, if they have
any, as there seems no particular reason to doubt, are too attenuated to
be audible to our human ears—yet they are not quite invisible. When
seen, however, they are known by some other name, such as frog-hoppers,
tree-hoppers, or the like. Some of these, in their larval stage, which
much resembles the adult, take a great deal of pains to conceal
themselves, though in this they have another reason than that of wishing
to elude observation. Our common cuckoo-spit is a good instance of this,
and also of how a wrong explanation of a common and easily observed
phenomenon may for a long time be given, not only in popular works, but
also in scientific text-books or monographs, or within the supposedly
up-to-date pages of various encyclopædias. The cuckoo-spit, as everyone
knows, sits in the midst of a little bower of froth (allied to that
other of bliss perhaps) which, on being examined, resolves itself into
an accumulation of bubbles, having a somewhat sticky consistency. We had
always been told—and still are now very often, though the contrary has
been well made out—that these bubbles proceeded from the insect itself,
after the manner of any other secretion. But this is not the case. The
secretion here is only a clear fluid, and into this the insect
afterwards blows bubbles by a mechanical process, and through the
addition of air. It is Professor E. S. Morse who, in the pages of
_Appleton’s Popular Scientific Monthly_,[35] has thus revolutionised all
our ideas on this subject. His account is as follows: “The so-called
frog-spittle or cuckoo-spit appears as little flecks of froth on grass,
buttercups, and many other plants during the early summer. Immersed in
this froth is found a little green insect, sometimes two or three of
them concealed by the same moist covering. This little creature
represents the early stage of an insect which, in its full growth, still
lives upon grass, and is easily recognised by its triangular shape and
its ability of jumping like a grasshopper.”

“If the insect is cleared from the mass of froth it will crawl quite
rapidly along the stem of the plant, stopping, at times, to pierce the
stem for the purpose of sucking the juices within, and finally settling
down in earnest, clutching the stem with its legs. After sucking for
some time, a clear fluid is seen to exude from the end of the abdomen,
flowing over the body first, and gradually filling up the spaces between
the legs and the lower part of the body and the stem upon which it
rests. During all this time not a trace of an air-bubble appears; simply
a clear, slightly viscid fluid is exuded, and this is the only matter
that escapes from the insect. This state of partial immersion continues
for an hour or more. During this time, and even when walking, the
posterior segments of the insect’s abdomen are extended at intervals,
the abdomen turning upwards at the same time. It is a kind of
reaching-up movement, but whether this action accompanies a discharge of
fluid, or is an attempt at reaching for air, I have not ascertained.
Suddenly the insect begins to make bubbles by turning its tail out of
the fluid, opening the posterior segment, and grasping, as with a pair
of claspers, a moiety of air, then turning the tail down into the fluid,
again, and instantly allowing the enclosed air to escape. These
movements go on at the rate of seventy or eighty times a minute. The
tail is moved alternately to the right and left in perfect rhythm, so
that the bubbles are distributed on both sides of the body, and these
are crowded towards the head, till the entire fluid is filled with
bubbles, and the froth thus made runs over the back and around the stem.
In half a minute some thirty or forty bubbles are made in this way—a
bulk of air two or three times exceeding that of the body—without the
slightest diminution in the size of the body.”

It seems clear, therefore, that the air which is put to this purpose is
abstracted directly from the atmosphere, and that neither it nor the
bubbles manufactured through it have ever been within the body of the
insect. Moreover, if the little bubble-maker be thoroughly dried—which,
according to Professor Morse, is a matter of difficulty—it will continue
to secrete such spare fluid as it still has, but not the tiniest bubble
is seen to issue with this. If set in a drop of water it struggles to
the surface, and then goes through the same process of blowing bubbles
as it has done when immersed in fluid of its own distilling. The result,
however, is not the same, for the water will not hold the bubbles, which
constantly disappear. Such, then, is the manner in which the frothy pool
is made. What purposes does it answer? That of a pond, apparently, for
it would appear that in their larval state these little frog-, or
tree-hoppers, are to some extent aquatic insects. If kept dry and not
allowed to renew their supply of fluid, their body shrivels, and before
long they die. This is not through suffocation, since they can breathe
air, by means of spiracles, in the ordinary way. If, however, they are
examined closely, certain leaf-like appendages may be detected upon each
side of the seventh and eighth segments of the abdomen, and Professor
Morse suggests that these may be of the nature of branchiæ, or gills,
enabling the insect to breathe, also, in water or fluid, by abstracting
the air from it, after the manner of a fish, as some other aquatic larvæ
do. “As many of these,” he says, “respire in two ways, either inhaling
air through the spiracles, or by means of branchial leaflets, so
_Aphrophora_ (for that is the classic name of our insect) may likewise
utilise its branchial tufts for the same purpose. Thus we may see the
reason for this bubble-blowing, since each fresh bubble added to the
mass may aerate the fluid, so to speak, and thus secure at intervals a
fresh supply of oxygen.”[36]

In early spring, if one examines the leaf-buds of rose trees, which now
begin to swell, one may often see tiny little black specks, like grains
of gunpowder, scattered over their surface, especially within any fold
or crevice which it presents. These are the eggs of the Aphides, insects
which, if not cicadas, are not so very far removed from them, and which,
looked at from various points of view, are extremely interesting little
creatures. One of these points of view, which we may conveniently start
from, is their extraordinary rate of increase, which exceeds even that
of the Chinese. “A single insect,” says Mr. Buckton, “hatched from one
of these shining black ova may be the mother of many billions of young,
even during her lifetime. Réaumur calculated that one Aphis may be the
mother of the enormous number of 5,904,900,000 individuals during the
month or six weeks of her existence. But neither Tongard nor Morren is
satisfied with this estimate, both declaring that quintillions are
within the capabilities of a single mother’s efforts. Professor Huxley
(who, by the way, was not interested in the alleged phenomena of
spiritualism, _even if true_) makes a curious calculation which, at any
rate, affords some approximate idea of what a quintillion of Aphides
might mean. Assuming that an Aphis weighs as little as one-thousandth of
a grain (which is less than I should ever have thought), and that it
requires a man to be very stout to weigh more than two million grains,
he shows that the tenth brood of Aphides alone, without adding the
product of all the generations which precede the tenth, if all the
members survive the perils to which they are exposed, contains more
ponderable substance than 500,000,000 of stout men: that is, more than
the whole population of China.”[37] This, it appears, is an
under-estimate, which is rather annoying, for one would like to call it
a gross exaggeration. But facts are facts—in whatever degree they may
interest one—and it is impossible not to feel respect for an insect like
this, especially in these days, when the diminished returns of the
census are beginning to cause alarm as to the future destinies even of
our own once proudly fecund race. It is a wonderful record for a single
individual—to have weighed down China—and when Mr. Buckton remarks that
facts like these regarding the prolific nature of Aphides “afford
sufficient explanation of the occurrence of the extraordinary swarms so
often noticed by authors,”[37] nobody is likely to disagree with him.
With billions a certainty, and quintillions in the air, swarms seem
amply accounted for.

One of the authors here alluded to is our homely immortal, White of
Selborne. “I shall here mention,” he says, “an emigration of small
Aphides, which was observed in the village of Selborne no longer ago
than August 1st, 1785. At about three o’clock in the afternoon of that
day, which was very hot, the people of this village were surprised by a
shower of Aphides, or smother-flies, which fell in these parts. Those
that were walking in the streets at that juncture found themselves
covered with these insects, which settled, also, on the hedges and
gardens, blackening all the vegetables where they alighted. My annuals
were discoloured with them, and the stalks of a bed of onions were quite
coated over for six days after. These armies were then, no doubt, in a
state of emigration and shifting their quarters; and might have come, as
far as we know, from the great hop-plantations of Kent or Sussex, the
wind being, all that day, in the easterly quarter. They were observed,
at the same time, in great clouds about Farnham, and all along the vale
from Farnham to Alton.”[38]

Other great migrations of Aphides have at various times been observed.
In the autumn of 1834 the city of Gand was invaded, and, one may almost
say, taken by a vast army of them, and at Bruges and Antwerp the same
swarm is said to have darkened the sun,[39] a result of such gatherings
more noticeable elsewhere than in England, since our sun usually is
darkened. Insects, though their movements are not so regular, nor, as a
rule, so noticeable as those of birds, yet often migrate—how often or
how regularly it is difficult to say. Locusts are, of course, the stock
example as well as the most terrific one, but perhaps dragon-flies, were
they as destructive, would have been as much noted in this connexion.
Their migrations seem to be tolerably frequent, and a record of them
between 1494 and 1868 has been published by Koppen, a German
entomologist. In 1881 a great flight of them took place in Illinois.
“The air,” we are told, “for miles around seemed literally alive with
these dragon-flies, from a foot above ground to as far as eye could
reach, all flying in the same direction, a south-westerly course, and
the few that would occasionally cross the track of the majority could
all the more easily be noticed from the very regular and swift course
they generally pursued; but even these few stray ones would soon fall in
with the rest again. Very few were seen alighting and all carefully
avoided any movable obstacles.”[40] This migration took place during a
very dry season, and may have been caused by it owing to the drying up
of swamps, ponds, etc., in which the insects would otherwise have laid
their eggs, obliging them to seek other suitable places.

In the spring of 1900 a great migration of dragon-flies was observed in
Belgium. “All the observers agree that the insects flew rather low, with
astonishing regularity, and without resting; that they kept close to the
earth, where there were no obstacles, but that they mounted to a height
of 10 to 12 mètres when houses or trees were in the way. They did not go
round obstacles in their line of route, but surmounted them, and
descended on the other side. According to some observers, their flight
was very slow, others again asserting that it was very swift. When the
velocity could be estimated, however, it was found to be at 5 mètres per
second or 18 kilometres (11¼ miles) per hour (so that the slows have
it). In general they went in groups, more or less isolated, and more or
less dense.” The writer of the above account—a Belgian—concludes thus:
“All the facts point to the following conclusions: The dragon-flies of
the 5th came from regions situated to the east of the country, which
they entered in several columns, flying at a great altitude: between 7
and 8 a.m. they descended towards the earth, continuing their route
towards the west. But we remain in ignorance of their point of
departure. The swarm probably quitted its usual habitation early in the
morning, and immediately flew to a great height. It was only on arriving
near the earth that they flew against the wind”[41] (which, however,
they then continued to do).

What Mr. Hudson calls “dragon-fly storms” are a special phenomenon of
the Pampas. In this case the cause of the migration—for such movements
seem to come under this heading—is a special wind called the _pampero_,
that blows south-west from the interior of the Pampas. It is very
violent, cold, and dry, and the dragon-flies evidently fear it. The
“storm” is thus described by Mr. Hudson: “It is in summer and autumn
that the large dragon-flies appear; not _with_ the wind, but—and this is
the most curious part of the matter—in advance of it; and inasmuch as
these insects are not seen in the country at other times, and frequently
appear in seasons of prolonged drought, when all the marshes and
watercourses for many hundreds of miles are dry, they must, of course,
traverse immense distances, flying before the wind at a speed of 70 or
80 miles an hour. On some occasions they appear almost simultaneously
with the wind, going by like a flash, and instantly disappearing from
sight. You have scarcely time to see them before the wind strikes you.
As a rule, however, they make their appearance from 5 to 15 minutes
before the wind strikes; and when they are in great numbers, the air, to
a height of 10 or 12 feet above the surface of the ground, is all at
once seen to be full of them, rushing past with extraordinary velocity
in a north-easterly direction. In very oppressive weather, and when the
swiftly advancing _pampero_ brings no moving mountains of mingled cloud
and dust, and is, consequently, not expected, the sudden apparition of
the dragon-fly is a most welcome one, for then an immediate burst of
cold wind is confidently looked for. In the expressive vernacular of the
gauchos the large dragon-fly is called ‘_hijo del pampero_,’ son of the
south-west wind.”[42]


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER XI


    Aphides and their enemies—Curious interrelations—The biter
      bit—Altruistic development—Bread and beer protectors—Saved
      by ladybirds.

WITH prolific powers which have been successful in arousing the interest
even of the late Professor Huxley, it is a comfort to think that the
numbers of the Aphides are always being kept down by the operation of
certain well-contrived causes, most of which take the shape of various
insect enemies. Were all of these, or perhaps were any one of them,
entirely removed, the whole world apparently might find itself deep
buried beneath a “star-y-pointing pyramid” of insect organisms, for what
cannot quintillions, in the hands of a competent mathematician, achieve?
The wonder certainly seems that any kind of check should be sufficient.
We owe our safety, in part, as might have been surmised, to a small
Ichneumon Fly, the traces of whose work may generally be seen in a
number of brown lifeless corpses, which are dotted about like so many
skeletons at the feast, amongst any collection of living Aphides. These,
if examined more closely, are seen to be mere empty sacs, each one
having at some part of it a quite circular aperture, through which the
issuing guest has escaped. But the amount of the good thus effected is
not to be estimated by the number of these shells, these nests from
which the bird has flown. Such are only in the last stage of things,
whilst almost all, including the healthiest-looking of the living
Aphides, are probably travelling along the same road, to arrive at the
same goal. All, or almost all, have within them a guest whose energies
are unceasingly devoted to absorbing the whole of their interior
arrangements into itself, and gradually taking their place. “In June,”
says Mr. Buckton, “during the hot weather, I have seen, at the same
time, as many as three of these flies on one rose sprig, each poised on
the back of an Aphis, which throws itself into many contortions for the
purpose of throwing off its enemy. The Ichneumon, however, remains fixed
on the back for ten or more minutes (as though enjoying the situation)
before the ovipositor is thrust under the skin of the victim and the egg
is laid. The Aphis appears to suffer at first but little, since it soon
resumes its occupation of pumping up the sap. A worm-like, or more
commonly, a maggot-like creature, according to the species of the
parasite, hatches from this egg, which revels in the organised
nutritious fluid elaborated by the Aphis. The greater part of the
abdomen is occupied by this maggot when it becomes full fed, and then it
may often be seen through the transparent integument, as a grub curled
into a semicircle. Finally, the Aphis dies, the grub ceases to feed, and
after a certain period of rest cuts out of the roof of its prison a
circular plate, like a trap-door, as regular in form as if a carpenter’s
centre-bit had been used. The emerging fly has four wings, long antennæ
composed of numerous joints, a wasp-like body and legs, and is in every
way suited for its marauding expeditions.”[43]

Other and more interesting dramas can take place within the body of an
Aphis; wheels within wheels, one masterpiece of economic contrivance
enclosing another, perfection more perfected. Along what path, indeed,
can the beauty and wisdom of Nature—those endless steps from endless
seeming halting-places that become, when reached, but so many points of
fresh departure—be run to earth, so to speak? The brain becomes, at
last, almost weary in the pursuit of wisdom’s ways, and even the
delighted spirit would fain cry, “Hold! Enough!” Thoughts like these are
powerfully excited by the following picture.

It is spring, early spring, and already the young Aphides have begun,
with gladness born of the opening year, to absorb the sweet sap from the
stems of the immature wheat-crop. Later, however, when July’s sun shines
brightly behind its cooling screen of clouds—for in England all climatic
extremes are tempered—they ascend in “numbers numberless” to attack the
ear itself. What, then, can save the hope of the husbandman? What but
_Ephedrus plagiator_, a small black-winged Ichneumon Fly that even now
is at work? As each individual Aphis clings to the wheat, it becomes, in
spite of its efforts to fill itself, hollower and hollower; its appetite
flags, and ere it can fatally affect the plant on which man’s life and
the machinations of the protectionist depend, it has become a mere brown
pupa-case for a body other than its own to develop in. A day or two, and
almost on every grain of the wheat hangs an insect, lifeless, but—oh,
floweret springing from the tomb!—life-filled. Hardly a living Aphis is
to be seen feeding amongst them. The wheat-crop has been saved. But the
march of events, thus unfolded, does not end here. Another drama has to
be played out ere the full life issues from the once living cradle whose
contents it has absorbed and become, nor will it bear the image of that
particular Ichneumon Fly that laid its little egg, some weeks ago, in
the body that seemed so designed for it. Like the Aphis, the Ichneumon,
too, must learn to live for others, thus rising through selfishness to a
purer and higher embodiment. If we pass a little later through the same
cornfield, another insect, differing from, yet of the same general type
as the prior parasite, may be seen running to and fro over the
wheat-ears, tapping each tenanted abode with tremulously quivering
antennæ, which, as well as the whole body, seem to vibrate with
excitement. It is looking for lodgings, but not every house so touched
can be utilised, for _Ceraphrus Carpenteri_—such is the new tenant’s
name—must first be satisfied that none of its own species have already
taken possession. Once assured on this point, however, its duty lies
plain before it, and bending its antennæ against the wheat-ear, so as to
form a fulcrum, it turns the tip of its abdomen towards that of the dead
Aphis, and with its ovipositor commences to saw through the skin. As
much as ten minutes may be occupied in the accomplishment of this task,
for the sarcophagus that has thus to be pierced is hard, and the
ovipositor, though short, is not stout, but slenderly formed. But there
is no flagging of energy, and at length, when efforts steadily continued
have been crowned with success, the same deft instrument is again
employed to pierce the sleeping _ephedrus_, and a second egg is
deposited in this second cradle. To this new tenant the former one must
now yield up the juices of its body, even as those of the Aphis were
freely rendered unto it. It must die in its turn, but by its death
another lives, and thus the physical act of aggression, which we call
selfishness, becomes the seed-bed, as it were, or forcing-house—the
food-plant, to use an entomological simile—of a moral altruism. True,
the Aphis may at first struggle, the maggot, pierced by the ovipositor,
may flinch for a moment, but after that there is complete passivity,
without which there can be no complete acquiescence. Self-absorption,
that is the moral of it all; for the true self of the Aphis, which is
not represented by the outer husk, is absorbed into the Ichneumon, and
so in regard to the latter. Thus, throughout the animal kingdom we must
look to the inner, and not to the outer, significance. What matters it,
though Nature be “red in tooth and claw,” if the fierce rendings of the
outer integuments are but as the first gropings towards interior rest
and calm? And should we not, in the lower walks of life, look to the
soul through the body, and see in processes which, with ourselves, might
seem to represent the flesh only, a blending which but anticipates the
more complete separation? Thus, and thus only, as it appears to me, can
we impart beauty to a scheme which, without this key, must appear
selfish and unsatisfactory. The key may be hard to find, but when we
once hold it we need no longer repine.

Besides the Wheat Aphis, which but for such arrangements as have here
been glanced at, would almost deprive us of bread, we have the Hop
Aphis, a species the dread of which is still more strongly disseminated
amongst the masses of this country, inasmuch as its interference would
be with the supply of beer. No wonder, then, that the little ladybird is
beloved by all, since, but for its efforts, many a poor man might have
to live in a state of enforced sobriety, which, in its turn, must
deleteriously affect that position of respect and esteem which many
illustrious and highly placed individuals now hold in the hearts of the
people, so that a general disturbal of habits and ideas, amounting
almost to moral chaos, would attend any serious diminution in the
numbers of this insect, England’s true guardian angel. But it were
unjust to claim an undue share in the merit of recognising work like
this. Appreciation of such services is, as one might expect, widely
spread, and is expressed in such popular names as, for instance, in
Lombardy “Bestioline del Signore,” in Tuscany “Madonnine” or
“Marioline,” in France “Bête” or “Vache à Dieu,” and in Germany
“Sonnenkäfer.” The first-named countries, indeed, are not, or used not
to be, beer-drinking, so that unless this little madonna is a patroness
of the vine too, they are not so easy to understand. It may, however, be
incidentally mentioned that the ladybirds are good friends to the
orchards, and destroy many thousands of apple- or plum-eating Aphides.

Aphides, in fact, of some kind or other, are what they have come into
the world to destroy. It is their mission, their epos.

The following account of the habits of these beneficent creatures,
principally in the above connection, is given by Mr. Buckton, a profound
student of insect life-histories: “The food of Coccinella (the ladybird)
consists almost exclusively of Aphides. Their marvellous voracity is
shown equally in their larval and their winged condition. The former
stage may be commonly seen throughout early summer as slaty-grey or
brown six-footed creatures, covered with tufted tubercles, and provided
with mandibles efficient both for holding and sucking out the juices of
their victims. In some years the imagos (or grown insects) are
wonderfully numerous, and when they take wing form vast swarms which
travel great distances. In the year 1869 such a cloud passed over a
large part of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey,” and their effect (of the same
genial nature as that of Bacchus wandering through the earth) was soon
seen in the good hop crop of the following year. “Although the
Coccinella is not restricted to the Hop Aphis for its food, it
frequently follows its migrations, and travels on the same winds. Whilst
feeding, the Aphis is held and manipulated by the jaws or palpi of the
Coccinella, and the devouring operation proceeds amidst the struggles of
the victims from the apex of the abdomen to the thorax, which parts,
together with the head and legs, are finally rejected.”[43] This
process—which is by no means confined to insect life, but extends
upwards from it even into the highly organised mammalia—does not seem to
be a pleasant one to witness, for Mr. Buckton remarks upon it: “We may
express some hope, in sympathy with the Aphis, that the automatic theory
of animal life may here find some place, and that reflex action may
explain the fact that, under the microscope, the mutilated remains of
the Aphis, without stomach and without internal organs, have been seen
to walk away and live after the operation for a considerable time!
Automatically the Coccinella furbishes up its jaws and antennæ in
readiness for another meal. From thirty to forty Aphides may thus be
consumed in one hour.”[43]

Automatically perhaps—that is to say, between the lines—we may gather
Mr. Buckton’s opinion of the automatic theory. There are some theories
which seem held, like dykes or barriers, to prevent the sea from getting
in. One doesn’t want the sea to get in, because it would swamp such a
lot of things, which, although quite artificial, one is not prepared to
part with, but one doesn’t believe in the barrier except for that
particular purpose to which it is applied. The automatic theory in
regard to animals is a case in point. Scientific men make use of it in
order to keep out another, which they don’t want to have to admit,
though they do, as a fact, believe in it. This, again, one can read
between the lines whenever they give any account of their observations
on this or that animal, whether it be dog or elephant, ants or something
much lower down in the scale—rotifers, for instance, or amœba in the
ocean of a watch-glass. One sees what they really mean very well then,
though they may not themselves be aware of it, but they are never in the
least _convincing_ when they air their automatic theory. Aphides, as may
have been gathered incidentally, feed wholly upon the juices or sap of
plants. Active _ab ovo_ (which means from the egg), “their occupation,”
says Mr. Buckton, “is to grow as fast as possible,” and with a view to
this end the rostrum or beak, with its enclosed sucking or pumping
apparatus, is fully developed from the very commencement, “often,
indeed, to such an abnormal extent that it forms an awkward appendage,
trailing behind the body whilst walking.”[43] The insect does not,
however, walk much, but, settling itself down on the twig or stem where,
perhaps, it first saw the light, pierces the bark with the instrument
thus provided for it, and commences to suck up the sap into its mouth.
This is not a process which can be indulged in with impunity to the
plant, especially since Aphides reside in great societies upon the same
one, and turn their attention to every part of it, not even excepting
the roots. Troops of small Aphides, in fact, have sometimes been found
in the pips of large codling apples. In consequence of this excessive
drain upon their fluids, which is as though our own blood were to be
sucked, plants thus invaded by Aphides become greatly weakened, and
their young shoots and leaves have a distorted appearance in
consequence. Others, either through this cause alone, or in consequence
of some poison or acid injected by the Aphis, have gall-like excresences
produced upon them. These have a hollow interior, into which the Aphides
penetrate, and there take up their residence. Such swellings thus become
their houses, and therefore, since it is a great advantage to the
Aphides to be sheltered in this way, it is possible that some special
instinct through the exercise of which the tree is thus affected, may
have been implanted in them by the action of natural selection.

Aphides are often spoken of by entomologists as if a very high degree of
interest attached to them, and, no doubt, in many respects this is the
case. As we have seen, they exhibit certain phenomena of _corporealism_
(which _did_ interest Professor Huxley) to a greater extent perhaps than
any other creature, though of this I am not at all sure; but after all
one soon gets over the wonder of that, especially since there is no
realising it, and then it does not seem to raise a creature to a very
high level of interest. Again, to quote authority, “there is a most
curious alternation of broods in these insects, some forms being winged
and with separate sexes, and others wingless or apterous and capable of
producing their kind for an indefinite number of generations before a
sexual brood is again developed. In fact, the anomalies of members of
this family are endless, and it would require volumes to epitomise even
the comparatively little which has already been discovered with
reference to their habits and transformations.”[44] Still, for all this,
it is difficult to look long at an Aphis, or a collection of Aphides
upon a rose tree or any other of the plants they affect, without getting
heartily tired of them, and for me, as perhaps for most people, the
principal interest about these sluggish creatures lies in the relations
which have become established, without any intelligent efforts on their
own part, between them and ants—but it will be best to reserve the
discussion of this subject for the following chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             CHAPTER XII


    Ants and their honey-cows—A mutual benefit—Unity of motive—The
      end and the means—Two ways of getting honey—Insect
      cattle—Wasps as cow-milkers—A cow-keeping bee—Ant
      cow-sheds—Aphides in ants’ nests—Children of light and
      darkness—Forethought extraordinary.

A drop of honey, or something like it, is the connecting bond between
the ant and the Aphis. It is exuded by the latter through certain
tubercles which are situated at the end of the abdomen, and is, of
course, the product of the endless quantities of sap, which, so long as
it lasts, these insects are for ever pumping up from the plant they
inhabit, and swallowing. This honey, or honey-dew, to use the more
special name bestowed on it, the ants want, but they are not content
with drinking it whenever it issues from its manufacturers, in natural
course. This is not sufficient, and they have learned to increase the
flow of so valued a beverage by their own efforts—in other words, they
milk the Aphides, which thus become their cows. To do this they tap them
with their antennæ, softly and gently, on the sides of the abdomen—a
quick little shower of touches. Under the influence of this probably
pleasant sensation the Aphis becomes willing to part, and, raising the
abdomen, “teems her refreshing dew” in a drop from the tip of it. This
action of the ants cannot, in Europe, be successfully imitated, at least
it has not been, and if an ant is not forthcoming the fluid is contained
in the body of the Aphis until necessity compels its being ejected.
Probably the ants, if delayed in their visits, are missed by the
Aphides, as a cow misses her milker, and long before they do excrete, as
the process is called, they would perhaps have done so had they felt
able. The sensation no doubt of the ant’s antennæ on the abdomen has
become, through usage, the almost necessary stimulus to the act produced
by it.

The above remarks are best illustrated by a quotation from Darwin,
which, in my opinion, should always be given in any general account of
the relations of ants and Aphides. “I removed,” says Darwin, “all the
ants from a group of about a dozen Aphides on a dock plant, and
prevented their attendance during several hours. After this interval I
felt sure that the Aphides would want to excrete. I watched them for
some time through a lens, but not one excreted. I then tickled and
stroked them with a hair in the same manner, as well as I could, as the
ants do with their antennæ; but not one excreted. Afterwards I allowed
an ant to visit them, and it immediately seemed, by its eager way of
running about, to be well aware what a rich flock it had discovered; it
then began to play with its antennæ on the abdomen first of one Aphis
and then of another; and each, as soon as it felt the antennæ, lifted up
its abdomen and excreted a limpid drop of sweet juice, which was eagerly
devoured by the ant. Even the quite young Aphides behaved in this
manner, showing that the action was instinctive, and not the result of
experience. It is certain, from the observations of Huber, that the
Aphides show no dislike to the ants: if the latter be not present, they
are at last compelled to eject their excretion. But, as the excretion is
extremely viscid it is no doubt a convenience to the Aphides to have it
removed; therefore, probably, they do not excrete solely for the good of
the ants.”[45]

If the reverse of this were the case, if the Aphides did excrete for the
sole benefit of the ants, then, in Darwin’s own opinion, the case for
natural selection would be broken down, and with this there would be
some better ground of reason for those who would see in relations of
this sort a set-off, as it were, against the never-ending bloodshed and
rapine, accompanied with suffering in varied—often in an intense—degree,
which is the very stuff out of which Nature has woven her mantle. But
there can be no essential difference where the principle at work is
precisely the same. So long as a creature does benefit itself, the way
in which it does it, and the incidental effects of its doing so, are of
no consequence; it is the motive power that the philosopher has to
consider, and there is little comfort—if comfort be needed—in knowing
that an animal, to do itself good, is doing good to some other, when one
also knows that, governed by the same incentive, it would as cheerfully
prey upon that other’s eye. As Hamlet says, in such a case “the
readiness is all.”

As an illustration of this truth here is another picture of how ants
procure honey from a weaker creature that may happen to have swallowed
it, when it is not to be obtained by the soft methods of persuasion.
“Once upon a time,” says Dr. Lincecum, “there dwelt in my yard a
flourishing colony of the very smallest species of black ant,” and
having described how these Lilliputians found and ate some syrup
belonging to the household, and were in consequence attacked by a larger
and stronger species, he continues, “They”—that is the attacking
party—“grabbed up the heavily burdened little fellows, doubled them, and
biting open the abdomen, drew out the full sac, and seemed to swallow
it. Then, casting the lacerated carcase aside, they furiously sprung
upon another of the panic-stricken crowd and repeated the horrid
operation.”[46] Clearly, then, Nature, so long as she can attain her
end, cares not by what means she attains it.

Independently of any feeling of comfort which the Aphides may experience
in being milked by the ants, observation at once shows that they benefit
largely, in a general way, by the attentions of the latter. It is not
enough for the ants to milk their cows when they happen to meet them.
They go very much farther than this, and cow-keeping is of as much
importance with them as with us. Lucky the Aphis who has a guard of ants
round it, fiery warriors prepared to defend their property against all
foes. None need be feared now. Let but an Ichneumon buzz, and a dozen
stalwarts start to the rescue.

          “I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.”

          “Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate,
           I’ll buckler thee against a million.”

And so they do indeed, or against any reasonable number. But there is no
combination amongst these banditti. Each comes but to eat his own Aphis,
and no one thinks of helping a friend. All therefore are powerless
before the organised attack of so fierce a bodyguard. Whilst the ants
are with them the Aphides are quite safe, and they are often permanently
guarded in this way. Other ants take even more elaborate precautions for
the safety of their property, placing them in stalls, where they stand,
by plastering earth, etc., about the plant on which they are feeding.
Lastly, others still conduct them into their own nest, where they keep
them, sometimes, in a chamber specially prepared for their reception,
every necessary measure being taken for their proper nourishment, and,
as one may say, comfort. Nay, the very eggs of the Aphides are tended by
the ants, and hatch out in their own nurseries. Nor is it little for
which they do all this, since, taking their size into consideration, the
yield of these ant-cows each day must be much greater than that of our
own—at least, I should imagine so.

It is not all ants who do these things, nor do any do all of them, but
where there are Aphides and also ants, it would seem to be the exception
rather than the rule for the latter to neglect them.

But Aphides, though the principal ant-cows of Europe, are not the only
ones even there, whilst elsewhere various other species that have this
honey-excreting property become their substitutes. “In the tropics,”
says Belt, in his much-observing work, “their place is taken in a great
measure by species of _coccidæ_ and genera of _Homoptera_, such as
_Membracis_ and its allies. My pineapples were greatly subject to the
attacks of a small, soft-bodied, brown coccus, that was always guarded
by a little black stinging ant (_Solenopsis_). This ant took great care
of the scale-insects, and attacked savagely any one interfering with
them, as I often found to my cost when trying to clear my pines by being
stung severely by them. Not content with watching over their cattle, the
ants brought up grains of damp earth, and built domed galleries over
them, in which, under the vigilant guard of their savage little
attendants, the scale insects must, I think, have been secure from the
attacks of all enemies.”[47] And again, the same naturalist tells us,
“The pawpaw trees growing in my garden were infested by a small brown
species of _Membracis_—one of the leaf-hoppers that laid its eggs in a
cottony nest on the under part of the leaves. The hopper would stand
covering the nest until the young were hatched. These were little
soft-bodied, dark-coloured insects, looking like Aphides, but more
robust, and with the hind segments turned up. From the end of these the
little larvæ exuded drops of honey, and were assiduously attended by
small ants belonging to two species of the genus _Pheidole_. A third
ant—a species of _Hypoclinea_—which I have mentioned before as a
cowardly species, whenever it found any young hoppers unattended, would
relieve them of their honey, but would scamper away on the approach of
any of the _Pheidole_. The latter do not sting, but they attack and bite
the hand if the young hoppers are interfered with.”[47] The latter “are,
when young, so soft-bodied and sluggish in their movements, and there
are so many enemies ready to prey upon them, that I imagine that in the
tropics many species would be exterminated if it were not for the
protection of the ants.”[47]

But these leaf-hoppers had not only ants, but wasps to protect them, and
there were constant skirmishes and bickerings on their account between
the two. The wasp obtained the honey just in the same way as the
ants—namely, by stroking the hoppers with its antennæ, and its
possession of wings, more than its greater size, gave it a clear
advantage over its rival. It did not grapple with the latter, even when
there was only a single one to dispute its right, but, rising on the
wing, and hovering about till a good opportunity presented itself, it
would dart down suddenly on the impertinent little dwarf, and strike it
from the leaf or stem. So quick was this action that Mr. Belt could not
determine whether it was with the feet or the mandibles that the wasp
delivered its blow, but he thinks it was with the former; that is to
say, the front pair of them. But in spite of its superiority in single
combat, the wasp could not prevail against the numbers of the ants. If,
indeed, it was first in the field, there was not much difficulty, for
though the leaf would before long be found by some or other of the ants,
yet the first arrivals were only pioneers, and when once they were
knocked off it it had to be found again, only for a similar fate to
befall the new discoverers. Often, however, the wasp would try to clear
a leaf already in possession of the ants, and the way to which was
known. But in this it was never successful, for though many fell,
streams of others came rushing up, so that the wasp had no time to enjoy
the fruits of its labours, but was obliged to keep constantly fighting,
and before long was tired out. Though a giant amongst pigmies, and
having wings—a sort of flying-dragon contending with an army of
knights—yet it did not despise its small enemies, and evidently dreaded
lest any of them should succeed in fastening on it. No doubt it
knew—from inheritance, or experience, or both—that an ant clinging to a
leg was a difficult thing to get rid of, and to avoid being placed in
this position it never fought upon the ground—that is, the leaf—but only
on the wing, in the manner described. Had it used its mandibles to bite
with, the ants would have seized them, and some might have got on its
body. Its sting played no part, doubtless because the small size and
hard bodies of the ants would have rendered it ineffective.

We see from the above account that ants are not the only insects that
can make discreet use of honey-yielding creatures, though they excel all
others in this respect. Wasps have also learnt to milk, if not to stall,
their kine, and to wasps, it would seem, must be added—which need not
surprise us—at least one species of bee. A correspondent, whose name and
date of communication I cannot now remember, says, writing to _Nature_:
“Fritz Muller has observed in Brazil a larva of a leaf-hopper—_Umbonia
indicator_—which is used, like the Aphides by the ants, as milch cattle
by a species of stingless bee—_Trigonia Cagafogo_. This bee is fond of
oily matters, and feeds on carrion, old stinking cheese, and oil
secreted by various plants. Although stingless, it possesses a very
intense venom, which causes a most lively irritation of the skin.” I
wish I could give the details of a fact so interesting, but have not had
the opportunity of reading the original account from which this bald
statement is taken. The ants, therefore, have rivals in this industry,
and possibly such rivalry may exist to an extent hitherto unsuspected.

Though the protection of these insects by the ants architecturally—by
moist earth placed round them, that is to say—is mentioned in the above
account, it is not dwelt upon, and seems to play but a small part in the
general drama. Some ants, however, rely solely on this method. Mr.
Gaudie, writing in the _Victorian Naturalist_,[48] gives the following
account of one of these: “A small species of ant, commonly distributed
in the Mallee, has a curious habit of keeping in close confinement a
rather large mealy Aphis, which feeds on the stems of young eucalyptus
gum trees. Round and over these Aphides the ants construct a domed
covering of particles of bark, grass, etc., which serves the double
purpose of imprisoning the aphides and excluding other ants. Some of
these coverings appear to be entirely closed, whilst others have an
opening left in the edges. This doorway is, however, constantly guarded
by a pair of ants, which continually move about in the open space, and
seem much impressed with the importance of the duty assigned to them.
Each enclosure contains generally from three to a dozen Aphides, and
about the same number of ants. Upon making a breach in some of these
structures for the purpose of observation, I have noticed that many of
the live stock were immediately seized by the ants and forcibly removed
to a place of safety. The ant under notice is about a quarter of an inch
in length, and is of a uniform dark, reddish-brown colour, and forms its
ordinary habitation under logs, or in old rotten stumps, and sometimes
in the ground. Several other species of ants are very assiduous in their
attendance on the various aphides, _tettigonidæ_, and coccids, but the
above is the only kind I have noticed that uses such extraordinary means
to secure a monopoly of the much-prized ‘honey-dew.’”

For ants that keep and rear Aphides in their nests we need not go
farther than our own little yellow one—_Lasius flavus_. They guard and
look after the eggs of their protégés, which form little black shiny
clusters, with the same care that they bestow on their own, and when
they are hatched set about providing food for the young aphides. This,
it would appear, does not consist of the roots of various plants
penetrating the nest itself, for Sir John Lubbock found that the first
business of the ants, after the young aphides had appeared, was to
conduct or carry them out of the nest, evidently in order that they
should find their natural food. None being at hand under these
artificial conditions, and the plants required not being known, the poor
aphides all died, and this happened again the following year. In the
year succeeding to this, however, Sir John was more fortunate, and this
is the account he gives of his interesting discovery: “The eggs
commenced to hatch the first week in March. Near one of my nests of
_Lasius flavus_, in which I had placed some of the eggs in question, was
a glass containing living specimens of several species of plants
commonly found on or around ants’ nests. To this some of the aphides
were brought by the ants. Shortly afterwards I observed on a plant of
daisy, in the axils of the leaves, some small aphides very much
resembling those from my nest, though we had not actually traced them
continuously. They seemed thriving, and remained stationary on the
daisy. Moreover, whether they had sprung from the black eggs or not, the
ants evidently valued them, for they built up a wall of earth round and
over them. So things remained throughout the summer, but on the 9th of
October I found that the aphides had laid some eggs exactly resembling
those found in the ants’ nests; and on examining daisy-plants from
outside I found on many of them similar aphides and more or less of the
same eggs.”[49]

As the young aphides had been brought by the ants to the daisies, and as
they had subsequently laid their eggs there, it would certainly seem
that the ants are accustomed to collect these eggs from without, and
that the aphides do not lay them in the nest. When they are hatched the
young aphides, as we have seen, are taken out to feed and lay, and these
new eggs laid by them are, in their turn, brought in and tended by the
ants. This, as Sir John Lubbock remarks, is a much more remarkable thing
than if the aphides, living in the nest with the ants, simply laid their
eggs there. In that case they would probably hatch out whether they were
tended or not, and it could not be long before the ants would become
aware of their value. Here, however, we see this knowledge—how first
obtained we know not—exhibited in a more striking manner, and also a
great degree of foresight displayed, since as the eggs, except for
accidents, would hatch where they were, it can only be with the idea of
providing against these that the ants bring them into their nest. There
they are safe from many dangers which threaten them above ground, and
are not exposed to the rigours of winter or other climatic vicissitudes.

What are we to say of this act? I think there might be one or two things
to say, but Sir John Lubbock says this: “Our ants may not, perhaps, lay
up food for the winter; but they do more, for they keep, during six
months, the eggs which will enable them to procure food during the
following summer—a case of prudence unexampled in the animal
kingdom.”[49] There is a slight national note here which should,
perhaps, make us suspicious. At least, I am always suspicious when a
Frenchman praises anything French, an Englishman anything English—even
ants or the climate—a Tierra del Fuegian anything in Tierra del Fuego,
and so on. No doubt if prudence really induces the act, it is very
great, but if we could imagine any other cause through which the habit
might have begun, natural selection would have brought about the rest,
since those ants which stored aphides’ eggs would have had more aphides,
and consequently more honey-dew to nourish them than those which did
not. Now the eggs might at first have been eaten, and so carried down,
as provisions, or aphides, brought into the nest, might have laid before
they got out again. However the act originated, it is probably a
prudential one now, but if the growth of prudence has been aided by that
of an inherited habit, having nothing to do with this, it is not quite
so remarkable. But what, exactly, does “our” in the above passage mean?
_Lasius flavus_ is not confined to England—at least, I suppose not—and
if other countries have a claim on its mental powers, our cue should
rather be to undervalue them—at least, the note of national vanity
should be held in check by the all as powerful one of national
prejudice.

Besides these particular aphides, which leave the nest directly after
leaving the egg, there are four or five other species which live in it
altogether, and feed on the roots of various growing plants. Some nests
which I had contained a few, but under natural conditions they are to be
found, I believe, in abundance. Special chambers, it would seem, are
given up to them, and in Kirby’s _Marvels of Ant Life_ there is a
picture of such a “subterranean cow-house.” The question arises, where
do these aphides lay their eggs, and, if in the nest, does not it
largely discount the intelligence, or prudence, attributed to _Lasius
flavus_ in bringing the other ones into it? In that case, since the eggs
of the various species probably resemble one another, any found outside
would be brought in by the ants, just as their own larvæ or pupæ would
be—or anything else which they value—nor need we ascribe greater
foresight to the one act than to the other.

Ants, however, do more wonderful things in relation to aphides than this
that Sir John Lubbock has recorded, and if that act is unexampled, as an
exhibition of prudence, elsewhere in the animal kingdom, it is not, I
think, in this particular branch of it. First it must be remarked that
amongst the aphides we have what is called the “alternation of
generations,” that is to say a light-loving generation that feeds on the
stems and leaves of upper earth, produces one that loves darkness, whose
food is only the underground roots of the plants their parents lived on.
This brood in its turn gives birth to another, which forthwith seeks the
sun, and so the round goes on. There is this difference in the two
broods, that the light-lovers, nevertheless, seek out darkness when the
time comes to lay their eggs, whilst the children of darkness lay theirs
in the caves where they have, all their lives, lived. That ants should
be aware of all this, and habitually adapt their cow-keeping economy to
circumstances so recondite, seems very extraordinary, but it would
certainly appear to be the case. Thus when _Lasius fuliginosus_ (another
Franco-Britannico, etc., species) sees _Schizoneura venusta_—its
particular Aphis—seated on a grass stem, and evidently wishing to lay
her eggs, it knows at once what to do. Soft and large, with voluminous
wings, such an insect is not well fitted for burrowing. She could hardly
do it, in fact, so the ants, recognising this, begin to do it for her,
and soon drive a tunnel leading down to the roots of the grass, through
which they lead her, first, however, having clipped off her wings, which
are now but a useless encumbrance.

Arrived at the terminus, the ants make a proper apartment for their cow
Aphis, and here, in the midst of warm sympathisers, and with every
comfort and luxury about her, she no longer hesitates to lay her eggs.
In due time they hatch, producing wingless aphides, and from the brood
thus raised the ants obtain their honey. When, however, this crawling
generation have in turn produced another winged one, the ants, far from
seeking to detain these in a place where they would only die, again set
to work to make tunnels, through which they conduct them successively to
the upper air. One tunnel, one would think, would be sufficient for the
purpose; but Lichtenstein, who observed these facts in the south of
France,[50] states that each Aphis, as it issues from the egg, has a
separate one made for it by the ants. Having reached the surface, these
cave-born Ariels spread their wings and fly away. Where they will settle
no ant knows, but to the community that has freed them they are lost,
probably—they and their eggs—for ever. Do the ants know this? If they
do, they do not repine at it, for they know also that the perpetuation
of the species, through which alone they can hope for fresh honey, has
been provided for. This seems to me altogether to outdo the prudential
feat of _Lasius flavus_, and since _Lasius fuliginosus_ is distributed
probably throughout the greater part of Europe, all the nations that do
honour to that portion of the earth’s surface are at equal liberty to
think of it with patriotic complacency as “_our_ ant.” For my part, I
will only say this, that, whether it is or not, I think it deserves to
be a Japanese ant—or that the Japanese, nowadays, much more deserve to
have it than we do: that perhaps is the better way of putting it.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER XIII


    Cow caterpillars—The adventures of Theophrastus—Cave-born
      Ariels—Led to the sky—A strange attraction—Ant slaves and
      slave-holders—Slave-making raids—Feeble masters—An ant
      mystery—Effects of slavery—The decadent’s reply.

AS we have seen, both in this chapter and a former one, aphides are not
the only insects which yield the ants honey—or something honey-sweet—and
are cherished by them in consequence. There are, for instance, the
coccidæ, or scale insects, as mentioned by Belt; but whilst some of this
family are milked in the same way as the aphides, to which, indeed, they
bear a strong resemblance, others are simply eaten, as though they were
sweets. To them might be said in warning, “Make yourself all honey, and
the _ants_ will swallow you,” but who can modify the nature of his own
juices? Then there are the ants’-nest beetles, many of which have a
sweet downiness which the ants enjoy licking, and are for this reason
carried about with them when they move from one place to another. Not
that they are always carried, for one little beetle, at any rate, whose
name—it must be a diminutive—is _Formicoxenus nitidulus_, is accustomed
to ride on the backs of its protectors, like the little cockroaches
discovered by Professor Wheeler.

But perhaps the most interesting parallel to the aphides, as cows, is to
be found in certain caterpillars, which are as soft and defenceless as
they are, and represent a class of creatures which ants habitually prey
upon. A certain family of butterflies, however, commonly known as the
Blues, but entitled to the scholarly name of _Lycænidæ_, produce
caterpillars which bear, upon the twelfth segment of the body, a certain
honey-holding reservoir which, when full or nearly so, may be made to
yield its contents through the same treatment which is so effectual in
the case of the aphides. The ants tap or titillate the body of the
caterpillar, near where the gland is situated, with their antennæ, and
the caterpillars, charmed with such affability, overflow in return. This
interesting fact has been observed in various parts of the Old World,
and also in North America; but the most detailed account which we have
of it comes from India. In this case, as in all the others, the
caterpillar is a quite small one, and feeds on the leaves of a certain
tree, bearing both “an astringent yellow fruit” and the name of
_Zizyphus jujuba_, though, by the way, jujubes are not, as a rule,
astringent. The name of this little caterpillar—it would scorn to be
behind the tree it feeds on in such a matter—is _Tarucus theophrastus_,
so now we have something to fix it in the memory. The ant that
patronises it is a large black one—_its_ name I cannot give—and here,
too, as in the case of the aphidean relations, we have, in the most
noteworthy of the actions recorded, a very remarkable instance of what
looks like foresight, and foresight, too, of a very large and general
kind. In the first place, the ants make a nest at the foot of the trees
in which the caterpillars reside, and here, during the period of their
growth and nourishment, they avail themselves of their services. But
when this period is over, and the caterpillars are about to change into
chrysalids, then a strange scene takes place. All over the tree, ants
are now to be seen running about in a state of the greatest excitement,
and whenever they meet a caterpillar descending, or preparing to
descend, the trunk, in order to burrow into the earth at its base, and
there pass its pupal stage of existence, they conduct it down themselves
and relieve it from the labour of digging, just in the same way as our
English ants do with the aphides.

Still stranger is the scene which reveals itself if the earth at the
base of the tree be removed, for then it is seen that chrysalids, and
caterpillars that are about to turn into chrysalids, are clinging all
round the trunk, whilst all amongst them are the ants, helping to place
this one or that one in position. The band thus formed round the tree
may be several inches broad, and it is always remarkably even, as though
arranged on æsthetic principles. As the light shines in, the ants become
agitated, and seizing hold of their property—for in this light they
consider the caterpillars—begin to rebury them, so that in time, if the
annoyance continues, they will form a fresh circle of bodies lower down
the tree. Here, then, is an ants’ nest, described as temporary by Mrs.
Wyllie, from whose interesting account[51] the above facts are taken,
full of butterfly chrysalids, and in about a week it becomes full of
butterflies themselves, and amidst the rough, black bodies of hosts of
earth-working Calibans, colours born of the rainbow gleam and flash from
the fairy wings of delicate insect Ariels. Each one of these was helped
from its cradle, thus strangely situated, by a little group of these
gnomes, who then assisted it to unfold its wings, and guided its
uncertain steps. Later, when strength has come to it, and something—it
knows not what—like an upward desire, these same gnomes will lead it to
the portals of their gloomy Hades, where it will spread its wings and
fly to meet the light. In so strange a way, led by such uncouth guides,
does Ariel find the sky. Yet, as though the place of their new
birth—gloomy though it be and opposed to their light-loving natures—had
yet some nameless attraction for them, crowds of these butterflies may
be seen, for some time after their exodus, hovering over the nest,
before they leave it for ever to dwell in the courts of the sun.

Just as in the case of the aphides released by _Lasius fuliginosus_,
these ants will never see their butterflies again, nor will they gain
any after advantage that can with certainty be traced to the particular
individuals thus set free. But they gain in such a manner as, if the
reflection really occurred to them, would make ants not much below men.
The process of reasoning would be this: “Though we may very likely not
get any caterpillars from the eggs which these butterflies will lay, yet
we ought not to kill them, because then there would be so many
butterflies less in the world, to lay eggs, and if we did this every
year, and other ants too, caterpillars, as well as butterflies, would
become scarce, and at last we should not get enough.” For myself I doubt
if ants really do reason like this, but by what steps this habit of
releasing butterflies so as to ensure the perpetuation of the species
has come about, I don’t quite see. In the case of the aphides, perhaps
it has been through actual observation of their habits, and here, too,
this hypothesis may not be excluded, since the butterflies might well be
seen laying their eggs, nor is it unlikely that these are watched, and
the issuing caterpillars tended from the beginning. For the purposes of
the ants, indeed, all aphides, and every theophrastus, would be the
same, and they might very well think that those which they found laying,
or about to lay their eggs, were the very ones previously liberated by
them from the nest. Thus the difficulty involved in supposing that they
must reason in a general and not merely in a particular way does not
really exist.

Some of these black caterpillar-tending ants of India are not always so
lucky as to secure stock. They may live far from a _jujube_ tree, and so
never meet the right species; but if ever they do, even though it be in
the most unexpected manner, they are not taken by surprise,
notwithstanding that other caterpillars are habitually devoured by them.
Mrs. Wyllie proved this by an experiment. “I took Theophrastus,” she
tells us, “from a tree, and introduced him on the pathway of another
company of the same species of ant, which lived in our verandah, but
kept no farm, and it was odd to see the ants come tumbling out headlong
to fight the intruder, and the sudden way in which they cooled down on
investigation of the foe. None attempted to harm him, and he was
politely escorted across the boundary, the ants running alongside and
feeling him all over with their antennæ. This must have been
instinctive, as they could have had no former knowledge of him as a
‘milk-giver.’” Mrs. Wyllie adds that “the dead chrysalids in an ants’
nest are carefully removed and thrown away outside; the ants also
distinguish between the dead and the living.”

Anyone observing or reading about ants might exclaim, on finding that
they utilised the natural product of other insects and kept them in
captivity in order to do so, “Where will this end? May they not, then,
also keep slaves?” And in very fact, as all the world now knows, we do
find what is called slavery amongst ants, though to me it hardly seems
the right word, since there is perfect willingness on the part of the
slave, and no power of punishment lies with the master. There is
equality, moreover, since this is not a matter of the kind of things
which one class of a community does and another does not do, but of the
spirit in which each does them. With the ants we have the Japanese
spirit—or rather the Japanese seem getting nearer to the ants—and so
there is real equality. However, the first act which makes these
creatures slaves—for I will use terms as I find them—is one of violent
and deadly hostility, and through it they are, of set purpose, taken
possession of and carried off to the nest. At that period, however, they
are yet in the cradle, have yet to be born into their last and most
perfect state of life. From the moment they are so born they grow up as
a part, and indeed the most important part, of the body politic, and of
such pleasure and consideration as obtains in ant-life they have their
full share.

From the above it may be gathered that these ant-slaves are ants
themselves, and this, indeed, is the case. One species of ant raids the
nest of another, overpowers the able-bodied inhabitants, slays or
incapacitates a certain number, and carries away with it to its own nest
as many of the helpless pupæ as it is able to. For a great many
years—thousands probably—these combats and carrying off of spoil had
been observed, but it had always been imagined that the pupæ—or ants’
eggs, as they are commonly called—were taken as provisions, merely to be
stored in the nest of the victor, and there eaten at leisure. The
discovery of the real truth was an era in the study of ant-history, and
it was made by a Frenchman—Pierre Huber—a man of whom Darwin says that
he was a “better observer even than his celebrated father,” for Pierre
was the son of François Huber, the blind man, who yet found out all
about bees. I hardly see how he can have been _better_ myself; but the
son was not blind, and, of course, eyesight is an advantage in
observation.

The particular species of ant concerning which this discovery was made
is _Formica rufescens_, or _Polyergus rufescens_—the reader may take his
choice—and Darwin, who impresses the facts of ant-slavery upon the mind
better than a dozen books specially devoted to ants or insects, says of
it: “This ant is absolutely dependent on its slaves, and without their
aid the species would certainly become extinct in a single year. The
males and fertile females do no work of any kind, and the workers, or
sterile females, though most energetic and courageous in capturing
slaves, do no other work. They are incapable of making their own nests
or of feeding their own larvæ. When the old nest is found inconvenient,
and they have to migrate, it is the slaves which determine the
migration, and actually carry their masters (one might just as well call
_them their_ slaves) in their jaws. So utterly helpless are the masters,
that when Huber shut up thirty of them without a slave, but with plenty
of the food which they like best, and with their own larvæ and pupæ to
stimulate them to work, they did nothing; they could not even feed
themselves, and many perished of hunger. Huber then introduced a single
slave, and she instantly set to work, fed and saved the survivors, made
some cells, and tended the larvæ, and put all to rights. What can be
more extraordinary than these well-ascertained facts?”[52] The slave-ant
in this case is _Formica fusca_, and it is also held in bondage by
another species of slave-maker, viz. _Formica sanguinea_—or the
Blood-red Ant—as was likewise a discovery of Pierre Huber. This last
species is found in the south of England, and its slave-making habits
have been observed by Darwin, who opened fourteen nests and found a few
slaves in all of them. “The slaves,” he tells us, “are black, and not
above half the size of their red masters, so that the contrast in their
appearance is great.”[52] The black ants were not often seen by Darwin
to leave the nest, and others who have observed their habits in England
have considered them as “strictly household slaves.”[52] Huber, however,
whose observations were carried on in Switzerland, says that “their
chief office is to search for aphides,”[52] and this would take them far
afield. In Switzerland, however, slaves seem to be more numerous in the
nests of the Blood-red Ant, and Darwin attributes the difference in
their habits to this account. Huber also tells us that the Swiss slaves
“habitually work with their masters in making the nest, and they alone
open and close the doors in the morning and evening.”[52] This is done,
I suppose, by placing pellets of earth in the mouth of the
entrance-tunnel and removing them again; but there is one species of ant
which would have only to place or remove itself, for this purpose, since
its large head, by being wedged into the passage, stops it up, and thus
fulfils the office of a front door. The ant that does this must be one
belonging to a certain caste of workers having very large heads, for the
heads of the other ones would not be large enough. The nest of this
species is made in decaying wood, and there is always some worker who
thus uses his large head as a stopper, removing it when a
fellow-townsman wishes to enter the nest, but presenting its smooth,
impenetrable surface, guarded with jaws, to all unauthorised intruders.
It is Forel, one of the best ant-observers of to-day, who tells us this,
and the ant apparently is _Lasius fuliginosus_, which is a British
species, and, according to an account which I have already referred to,
does not seem to be always a wood-borer. _Formica sanguinea_, however,
does things—or has things done for it—after a more ordinary fashion.

Darwin was the witness of a slave-raid on the part of _F. sanguinea_
which was not, in this instance, very successful. He says: “They
approached, and were vigorously repulsed by an independent community of
the slave-species (_F. fusca_), sometimes as many as three of these ants
clinging to the legs of the slave-making _sanguinea_. The latter
ruthlessly killed their small opponents, and carried their dead bodies
as food to their nest, twenty-nine yards distant; but they were
prevented from getting any pupæ to rear as slaves. I then dug up a small
parcel of the pupæ of _Formica fusca_ from another nest, and put them
down on a bare spot near the place of combat; they were eagerly seized
and carried off by the tyrants, who perhaps fancied that, after all,
they had been victorious in their late combat.”[52] In his work, _Ants
and their Ways_,[53] the Rev. Farren White describes a similar raid
which was—or rather which had been, for it was nearly over when he
arrived on the scene—wholly successful. Here, however, the oppressed
species seems to have made a very poor resistance, though very likely it
had been more vigorous in the earlier stages of the raid. “I watched a
_fusca_,” says Mr. White, “carrying off a pupa from behind the entrance
whence the _sanguineæ_ were issuing forth. Immediately it saw one of the
enemy approaching, it dropped its charge and left it to its fate. The
_sanguinea_ then gave it a push, and drove it off in double-quick time”;
and, again, “I noticed a _sanguinea_ coming up out of the nest with a
pupa, and a _fusca_, observing it, went up a fern-frond with the utmost
expedition.”[53] Other observations of a similar nature were made, and
the conclusion arrived at by Mr. White is “that between the _fuscæ_ and
the _sanguineæ_ there is a well-defined and clearly pronounced
antagonism. In presence of the _sanguineæ_ the _fuscæ_ were
terror-stricken. In fact the depredators had it all their own way, and
were able in this instance, at least, to carry out their marvellous
instincts without destroying a single life.”[53] It will be seen how ill
this accords with the account given by Darwin. My own way of accounting
for the discrepancy is that, in the first instance, the little _fuscæ_
were flushed with success, and, in the second, demoralised through
defeat. The same effects would follow the same causes in all but the
most splendid human armies.

The raids made by the first-mentioned species, _Polyergus rufescens_,
or, as Huber calls them, the Amazon ants, are of an even more determined
description, for none are braver, or perhaps so brave. If one of these
should find herself alone and in the midst of enemies, she makes no
effort to escape, as many, though not all, other species would, but
fights on to the end, making constant agile leaps to this side or that,
at every one of which she transfixes an enemy, and dies at last biting
hard. To fight, indeed, is the whole end, aim, and business of life for
an Amazon, and we have already seen how they do no work, and are washed,
fed, and carried by their servants. It is not quite true, however, that
they cannot feed themselves, as Pierre Huber thought, and had good
reason to think, for a well-known living observer—Herr Wasmann—has
discovered that their mandibles are so constructed as to enable them “to
absorb nourishment from eggs or pupæ.” Possibly the mandibles are
hollow, and communicate thus with the mouth, as is the case with some
other insects, but I have not Wasmann’s account at hand, and his
exponent says only this. Wasmann tells us also that these Amazons will
“absorb nourishment,” however they do it, even from the eggs of their
own species. They cannot, however, feed on liquid food, and as they had
no other when shut up without servants, that is why they died, or would
have died, had these not been brought them in time. So too, though their
slaves wash and brush them, yet they are always brushing themselves and
attending generally to their own toilette, and this they do even amidst

                    “All the currents of a heady fight,”

so that Wasmann has compared them to the Spartans combing their long
hair before the battle of Thermopylæ, though we are not told that they
combed it after the fight had begun.

Still, it seems plain that the habit of keeping slaves has exercised a
degrading influence on these ants, and this tendency is much more
markedly apparent in several other species. One of these with a really
dreadful name, _Strongylognathus_—we might call them Strong Ants, but
they seem to be weak ones—is described by Forel as “_une triste
caricature_” of the Amazons, and the extraordinary thing is that,
though themselves feeble and enervated, they manage to make, or by
some means obtain as slaves, the workers of a much more robust
species—_Tetramorium_, to wit; workers, by the way, are the only class
of ants ever enslaved. These weak ants fight in the same way as the
Amazons themselves; but, though spirited enough, they are so much
inferior in bodily vigour to the _Tetramoriums_, “a courageous species
living in large communities, that in a battle between the two,
artificially instigated by Forel, almost all the slave-holders were
killed, without being able to avenge their deaths even on a single one
of those whom they aspired to rule.” Yet they won the day, or rather
the already enslaved _Tetramoriums_, who marched to do battle for
them, won it for the few survivors in their ranks. From this we can
see how, when these decadents once have slaves, they may get more. The
difficulty is how they are obtained in the first instance—when a nest
is first founded by a queen of the slave-making species, for example.
It might be supposed, finding two kinds of ants living together, one
weaker and much more helpless than the other, that the former lived a
parasitic existence in the nest of the latter, and was not a
slave-owner at all; but this theory is disproved by the fact that no
males or females of the _Tetramoriums_ are ever to be found, showing
that it is not they but the others who are the true founders of the
nest.

A still more extraordinary instance of a slave-holding species of ant
than the one just mentioned is _Anergates atratulus_, for in this there
are no workers at all, only kings and queens, who are waited on, and
their eggs and larvæ fed and tended, by the slave species—_Tetramorium_,
in this case also—just as though these latter were their true-born
subjects. Here too the slave species is only represented by workers.
These male and female _Anergates_—a worker of the species has never been
known—are both few in number and weak in themselves. When a pair of them
(or a fertilised queen) go off to found a new colony, how do they, or
how do their few weak descendants, impress a strong fierce species into
their service, by whom the nest is built, and every other service
performed? The question remains unanswered. Nobody knows. Several
theories have been advanced, one by Sir John Lubbock, who supposes that
the king and queen of _Anergates_ assassinate the queen of _Tetramorium_
and reign in her stead,[54] and another, more recently, by Wasmann,
whose idea is that fertile queens of _Anergates_ are sometimes adopted
by a colony of _Tetramoriums_ who have lost their own queen. This last
is the newest suggestion, and is considered just at present, perhaps for
that reason, the most probable. To me Sir John Lubbock’s view seems
likelier to be correct, since it is more usual in nature for the weak to
prey, as parasites, upon the strong, than for the strong to seek
assistance of the weak. True, I can form no idea as to how the
assassination of the rightful queen takes place, but Nature is full of
resources, and will do much to promote a really worthy end.

I will conclude this chapter by quoting some remarks of Sir John Lubbock
as to the ill effects which the institution of slavery exercises, with
ants as with men, upon the character of the slave-holder. “These four
genera,” he says, “offer us every gradation from lawless violence to
contemptible parasitism. _Formica sanguinea_, which may be assumed to
have comparatively recently taken to slave-making, has not, as yet, been
materially affected. _Polyergus_, on the contrary, already illustrates
the lowering tendency of slavery. They have lost their knowledge of art
and their natural affection for their young! They are, however, bold and
powerful marauders. In _Strongylognathus_ the enervating influence of
slavery has gone further, and told even on the bodily strength. They are
no longer able to capture their slaves in fair and open warfare. Still,
they retain a semblance of authority, and, when roused, will fight
bravely, though in vain. In _Anergates_, finally, we come to the last
scene of this sad history. We may safely conclude that in distant times
their ancestors lived, as so many ants do now, partly by hunting, partly
on honey; that by degrees they became bold marauders, and gradually took
to keeping slaves; that for a time they maintained their strength and
agility, though losing, by degrees, their real independence, their arts,
and even many of their instincts; that gradually even their bodily force
dwindled away under the enervating influence to which they had subjected
themselves, until they sank to their present degraded condition—weak in
body and mind, few in numbers, and, apparently, nearly extinct, the
miserable representatives of far superior ancestors, maintaining a
precarious existence as contemptible parasites of their former
slaves.”[55]

Since, however, in all these cases the masters are still truly served by
their slaves, who make them comfortable, and have no more sense of their
degradation than they themselves have, an answer might be made to these
moralisings. However various the masks behind which true motives lie
hid, happiness, diversely conceived of, is the one end and aim of all.
Does it, then, really much matter by what means it is attained? Till we
can show that these slave-holding ants have become less and less happy,
we are only tilting at shadows, and an _Anergates_ might very well say,
in regard to the above view, “Tut, prut, drop your heroics. I am very
comfortable; these strong fellows work for me. I like not working, and
what I am I wish to be.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER XIV


    Ant partnerships—How some ants feed—Persuasive methods—An
      _imperium in imperio_—Amusement by instinct—Begging
      the question—Nest within nest—Ant errors v. human
      perfection—Distorted arguments—How partnerships
      begin—Housing an enemy—Ant ogres.

THE relation of slave and slave-master—to use the received
terminology—is not the only one of a social and friendly nature in
which ants of different species stand towards one another; for as will
have been gathered in the previous chapter, slavery amongst ants is a
quite friendly institution, conducted, in fact, upon the
“liberty-equality-fraternity” principle. Some species of ants,
however, inhabit the nests of other species, or build their own amidst
theirs in such a way as almost to make them one, and thus they live as
perpetual guests, not only without paying for such accommodation by
rendering their hosts any services, but often forcing these latter to
be of service to them in other ways also. Thus, a small species of
Texan ant whose first or Christian name is _Leptothorax_, but whose
surname has not yet been fixed upon, lives on these terms in the nests
of a larger one, the celebrated _Myrmica brevinodis_. Whether
Professor Wheeler was the discoverer of the little ant I am not quite
sure, but he was the first, I think, to observe its relations with the
big one and those of the big one with it, and his account of them is
excessively interesting. “A small dish,” he says, “containing a syrup
of sugar and water was placed near the nest (an artificial one under
close observation). This was soon found by two of the _Myrmica_
workers, which at once gorged themselves with the liquid and returned
into the nest.”[56] Soon afterwards a _Leptothorax_ worker entered it
also, and having run or tracked down one of the two honey-gorged
creatures, forthwith got up on to its back, and, seated there, began
to lick its head, an attention which it supplemented with a soft,
persuasive titillation with its antennæ, whilst at the same time
communicating a motion to its abdomen, which Professor Wheeler is so
convinced must have been accompanied with certain sounds—known to the
learned as stridulations—that he does not hesitate to affirm that it
was thrown “into stridulatory oscillation.” Nor was the _Myrmica_ deaf
to such an appeal. It slackened its pace, hesitated, then paused, and
as though unable longer to resist the influence, folded its antennæ
and appeared to give itself up to the full pleasure of the thing. The
tempter, now, still making soft play with the antennæ, lowered its own
head, and began to lick the _Myrmica_ first on one cheek and then the
other, including also the mandibles and parts adjoining. Thus
fostered, a dewy moisture, drawn evidently from the reservoir of
lately swallowed nectar, began to glisten on the lips of the large
ant, and, increasing rapidly to a droplet, was re-imbibed by the
expectant little one. “The latter,” says Professor Wheeler, “then
dismounted, ran to another _Myrmica_, climbed on its back, and
repeated the very same performance. Again it took toll, and passed on
to still another _Myrmica_.”[56] Up to the present the attention of
Professor Wheeler had been concentrated on the doings of this one
individual, but now, turning his attention to other parts of the nest,
he “observed that nearly all the _Leptothorax_ workers were similarly
employed. In one corner a number of _Myrmica_ workers had formed a
circle about a few of their small larvæ, which they were cleansing and
feeding. A _Leptothorax_ soon found its way to this cluster, and
stepped from the back of one ant to that of another, lavishing a
shampoo on each in turn, and apparently filling its crop with the
liquid contributions thus solicited.”

The above method of obtaining food appears to be peculiar to these ant
parasites. Beetles, for example, solicit it either by taps or touches
with the antennæ—which is a similar one indeed, but does not go so far
nor involve a ride—or else by stroking the face of their host with their
fore-feet. Other species of ants, when soliciting food from one another
or demanding it from their slaves, employ a more or less similar method,
whilst the _Lepismid_ that we have before spoken of is a thief pure and
simple. Licking seems to be the personal discovery of _Leptothorax_, and
being licked the peculiar privilege of _Myrmica brevinodis_. That it is
a valued one is clear, but the price asked for it is not always
forthcoming, possibly because there is not always anything to forthcome.
On such barren occasions _Leptothorax_ makes the best of a bad job, and
dismounting from its first love, runs about looking for another.

Sometimes, after having licked the head and face of its patron, the poor
petitioner turns round and proceeds to do the same by its abdomen. This,
perhaps, is a last effort of persuasion, but Professor Wheeler rather
supposes the surface of _Myrmica’s_ body to be “covered with some
agreeable secretion.” Queen _Myrmicas_, however, seem to be very rarely
treated to any sort of licking, and males apparently never. The reason
of this, probably, is that both queens and males are themselves
accustomed to receive their food from the workers by a similar process
of regurgitation, and are probably therefore not in the habit of
regurgitating it. They are therefore neglected by the little parasites,
who console themselves by being all the more insistent with those who
have something to give. These—that is to say, the workers—are waylaid
whenever they enter the nest, as having presumably found something to
eat outside it, and, in order to be on the spot, at once their
importunate lickers, who seem to live in a perpetual state of crying,
“Give! give!” keep in the more or less immediate proximity of the
entrance, or entrances, should there be more than one. Professor
Wheeler, indeed, doubts if the _Leptos_ ever feed themselves in the
ordinary way, but inasmuch as they were on one occasion seen by him to
do so, such doubt appears to me to be uncalled for.

These little ants make, in regard to the big ones within whose nest they
live, a sort of _imperium in imperio_. In a small chamber surrounded by
the large galleries of the _Myrmicas_, and communicating with these by a
passage too narrow for the latter to pass through, lives the queen with
a small number of workers; eight of them in the nest observed by
Professor Wheeler, together with a few larvæ, almost filling the cavity.
They appear to be on affectionate terms with one another, the workers
feeding their queen in the most assiduous manner, and she often playing
with them like a cat with her kittens, throwing them on to their backs,
and then “hugging and kissing them” (as Professor Wheeler describes it)
_con amore_. Not that the Professor himself takes this view of it, for
after hesitating whether to ascribe such behaviour to maternal
affection, “the play instinct,” or hunger, he decides for the latter—on
what grounds, since there was a continual passage of viands from one ant
to another, the queen especially being “assiduously fed,” I am unable to
see. What, too, is “the play instinct,” except a mere term made use of
in order to suggest the idea of automatism in regard to an act which
hardly seems to admit of such an interpretation? Instincts represent
imperious necessities which, if not attended to, the species must fail
or perish. Such, at any rate, are the grounds on which they must be
supposed to have been originally built up. But what creature has had to
play in order to survive? Not ants, surely, who work so hard that they
cannot stand in need of more exercise than their daily life affords
them. Nor, it would seem, is such an instinct developed amongst other
insects, which again seems to show that it cannot be of any great
importance. When, therefore, we find that ants, the most wonderful of
all insects, do play, this strongly suggests their possession of an
intelligence analogous to that of the higher animals. Instinct, however,
is largely independent of intelligence, such as we understand it, and
therefore, to allude to “the play instinct” in ants before the
instinctive character of the act has been made out, is to prejudge the
question whether ants are automatic or reasoning beings.

The smallness of the passages leading from the interior chamber of
_Leptothorax_ to the broad galleries of the _Myrmicas_ suggests that the
latter were not intended to pass through them; but we cannot really draw
this inference, since an ant in tunnelling would allow for the size of
its own body, but not for that of another species. Certain it is that
the big ants constantly force their way through the narrow passages,
thus partly breaking down the wall, and that they are then received by
the little ones in a quite friendly manner, and persuaded to part with
some of their interior stores. Still, when this has been effected, their
friends seem mildly desirous that they should go, and, as soon as they
have gone, set to work to repair the breaches made by their entrance. No
sooner has this been done, however, than they are broken down again, and
so it may continue, apparently, for an indefinite period, at any rate in
nests constructed for observational purposes, and where the conditions
are, therefore, more or less artificial. Whether it is so to anything
like the same extent under nature may well be doubted, for that any
creature should live in a state of never-ending useless labour does not
seem likely; and, moreover, unless the one ant could have made itself
comfortable within the nest of the other, why should it have become
established there at all? But whatever it may be outside the study, this
is Professor Wheeler’s account of what fell under his observation: “At
one p.m.,” he tells us, “the _Myrmica_ workers discovered the
hiding-place of their little companions, and two of them, in single
file, shouldered their way through the narrow passage, enlarging it as
they proceeded. As soon as the head of the first _Myrmica_ appeared in
the chamber, the _Leptothoraxes_ which had been attending to their
morning toilet and that of their larvæ, and to the careful arrangement
of their eggs, turned to meet the intruders.”

                              “Now dreadful deeds
                          Might have ensued,”

and for such an upshot, indeed, upon the first occasion, Professor
Wheeler was prepared. “For an instant,” he says, “I fully expected to
see a fierce battle, but I had misjudged the _Leptothorax_ character. To
my surprise the _Myrmicas_ on entering were received with a profusion of
shampooing, and, though sadly crowding the occupants of the little
chamber, they let themselves down comfortably, and appeared to
experience all the sensuous satisfaction of a couple of _roués_ who have
dropped into a Turkish bath for the night. Yet the little _Leptos_,
though behaving in this friendly manner” (their conduct indeed was not
more disinterested than upon other occasions), “seemed to have some dim
desire to remove the _Myrmicas_ from their nest, for from time to time
one was seen to pull with her mandibles at the fore leg or antenna of
one of the intruders, as if to remind her that there are limits to
polite hospitality.” Professor Wheeler adds that “this was the only act
even approaching hostility witnessed between the two species. The
_Myrmicas_ never showed the slightest irritation towards the _Leptos_,
never seized them in their mandibles or even menaced them. They seemed
rather to look upon the little creatures with gentle benevolence, much
as human adults regard little children. They never passed their little
guests without the antennal greeting, and the _Leptos_ shampooed their
hosts with comical zeal.”[56] The continued breaking down and repair of
the dividing wall is then described, with the conclusion that “in their
natural environment the _Leptothoraxes_ would not be cramped for space,
and would probably dig their cell where they would not so frequently be
disturbed by their inquisitive hosts.”

As regards the possible effects upon the _Myrmicas_ of having thus
frequently to render up food swallowed for their own nourishment, it
must be remembered that amongst most ants this is a thing of custom;
and, again, it seems probable that there would be an internal sense on
the part of the regurgitating individual as to concessions of this
nature having gone as far as it was healthy that they should go. As we
have seen, they are not infrequently refused. Professor Wheeler,
however, came to the conclusion that _Myrmica_ colonies suffer very
considerably from this cause, and on this he makes the following
comment: “If I have correctly estimated the influences which may tend to
diminish the fecundity and prosperity of the _Myrmicas_, we have in this
double nest another striking demonstration of the complete absence in
ants of any faculty of reason. For if the _Myrmicas_ possessed a glimmer
of this faculty they could easily annihilate the gluttonous little
nest-mates that are for ever roaming about their galleries like so many
animated stomach-pumps.”[56] Yes, truly a _most_ “striking
demonstration,” seeing that we human ants can annihilate, all in a
moment, any evil that has insensibly gained a footing amongst us, and
with which we have been familiarised from birth. Custom, growing
gradually from unnoticed beginnings, plays no part at all amongst
us—never affects our views in the very slightest degree. In Europe we
hang up all the brewers and distillers; whilst mobs of infuriated
Chinamen rend in pieces the vendors of opium and crushers of their
women’s feet. There is no such thing in _human_ nature as tolerating an
evil for the pleasure that lives in it; no _man_ ruins his health, and
sinks into an early grave, through being a slave to sensual pleasures.
Nor can what is manifestly wrong seem right to _us_; there is no
pernicious, obstinate, wilful shutting of _our_ eyes. What a contrast
does all this present with such a state of affairs as we are here
considering! And how plain it is that there can be no reasoning power in
the ant, since reason and right conduct are synonymous with man!

What is the origin of these strange co-partnerships—for there are
others—which we find existing between ants of two different species
living in the same or in one double nest? As we know, the different
species of ants are commonly very hostile to one another; and for any to
enter the nest of some other one is to court destruction, if they be not
the stronger party. Nay, they dare not even enter a strange nest of
their own species. It seems probable, therefore—this, at least, is my
own view of it—that such friendly cohabitation has come about through
the channel, not of peace, but of war—through successful encroachments
which, from being unavoidable, have come gradually to be less and less
resented, till the two parties, mingling freely, have learnt to live on
other terms. Now there are ants which live, like ogres, in the nests of
other species, preying upon their eggs and young. Such a one is
_Solenopsis fugax_—to whom we will come presently—but it is perhaps even
more interesting to find in species between whom relations of a similar
nature to those which we have been considering exist, occasional slight
traces of a mutual hostility. As between the _Leptos_ and _Myrmicas_
indeed this has only as yet been noticed, very faintly, on the part of
the former; but in regard to another pair who live together—our great
wood-ant, namely, _Formica rufa_ and tiny little _Formicoxenus
nitidulus_—Professor Wheeler remarks: “On one occasion in one of my
artificial nests, in which the ants had previously lived on good terms
with one another, I saw a _Formica_ touching a _Formicoxenus_ with her
antennæ and menacing her with her mandibles, but she departed without
even attempting to seize her. In the same nest I found a _Formicoxenus_
which had seized the leg of a _Formica_ in its mandibles and had died in
this position.”[57] Other observers, too, have from time to time—but
only very occasionally—noticed facts of the same sort. Through such
exceptional slight indications we may perhaps see, “as in a glass
darkly,” what things were at the beginning.

Let us now look at the beginning. _Solenopsis fugax_, Sir John Lubbock
tells us, “makes its chambers and galleries in the walls of the nests of
larger species, and is the bitter enemy of its hosts. The latter cannot
get at them because they are too large to enter the galleries. The
little _Solenopses_, therefore, are quite safe, and, as it appears, make
incursions into the nurseries of the larger ant and carry off the larvæ
as food. It is as if we had small dwarfs about eighteen inches to two
feet long harbouring in the walls of our houses and every now and then
carrying off some of our children into their horrid dens.”[58] This is
the general proposition. Monsieur Janet can add a few particulars. “The
_Solenopsis_,” he says, “may establish itself near almost any other ants
of our country, and is found especially with....” Here follows a list
all in Latin, but our common Wood-ant—the large one that makes those
great heaps of pine-needles—and the Amazon, or slave-making ant, are
contained in it.[59] “The _Solenopsis_ nest,” continues M. Janet, “may
partially surround that of its neighbour’s, or it may even be partly
excavated in the masses of earth which separate the galleries of the
latter. In each case—and probably, too, when, as is frequent, there is
not such close contiguity—fine connecting galleries enable the
_Solenopsis_ to make incursions into the nests of their neighbours,
where, as we shall see, they find an abundance of food. The actual nest
consists of a number of small circular chambers about 8-20 mm. in
diameter and only 6-8 mm. in height. Most of these chambers are
separated from one another by several centimetres, and are connected by
slender galleries, often less than two millimetres in diameter, entering
the chambers at their walls, ceilings, or floors, which latter are
remarkably clean, smooth, and hard.”[59]

The food of which these horrid little ants find such an abundance is, of
course, the cocoons and larvæ of their unfortunate neighbours, and M.
Janet gives the following account of the way in which they dispose of
them: “From ten to thirty of them,” he says, “climb up on to a cocoon
and cover it with little perforations which, finally, becoming
confluent, enable them to reach its contents. If it contains a pupa, the
legs and antennæ fall an easy prey to the mandibles of the _Solenopses_.
In this case the victim is cut into, sucked, and torn into very small
pieces, which the ants hasten to carry away into the interior of the
nest. The operation is much more difficult in the case of a larva which
has just spun its cocoon. Such a one I have seen the _Solenopses_ drag
into the interior of the nest and keep working at for twenty-four hours.
At the expiration of this period the larva began to look flaccid (as may
be believed), and was covered with little black dots which were,
sometimes, double, corresponding with the little wounds made by the
mandibles of its assassins. Numbers of the latter were busy lapping up
the liquid which exuded from the wounds, but it was not until thirty-six
hours had elapsed that the larva was entirely devoured.”[59] This is
certainly not a pleasant picture, yet, if our surmise is correct, the
remote descendants of these murderous _Solenopses_ may become as
harmless and as pretty in their ways as the little _Leptos_, a
reflection which goes far to discount any uncomfortable feelings we
might otherwise have been inclined to have in regard to the general plan
or scheme of things. Thus, in nature, though occasionally a slight
shadow may seem to rest upon the landscape, the next moment the very
memory of it is lost in a blaze of sunlight glory.

Forel believes that when a _Solenopsis_, and one of the larger species
of ants that it plagues, meet, the latter are unable to see it on
account of its small size, so that, practically, it is invisible. This
seems a strange doctrine, since the same ants can see smaller things;
and yet, from their behaviour under such circumstances, M. Janet is
inclined to think so too. It can hardly be that they shun combat, though
the _Solenopses_, in spite of their small size, are able, even here, by
virtue of their numbers, and being armed with stings, to meet their
victims, as one may almost call them, upon equal terms. M. Janet,
indeed, once saw so strong and warlike a species as the slave-making
_Formica sanguinea_ killed by some half-dozen _Solenopses_, but he adds
that on such occasions a considerable number of the latter were,
generally, killed also. This, however, is not sufficient to abate the
evil, so perhaps the molested species, finding that fighting is of no
use, accustomed to see _Solenopses_ from their birth, recognising, too,
as a part of their own atmosphere, the distinctive smell which they, no
doubt, possess, accept them like some disagreeable part of their lives,
and try to make the best of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER XV


    Ant wonders—Leaves cut for mushroom-growing—How ants plant
      mushrooms—A nest in a mushroom-bed—“Psychic plasticity”—Two
      opinions—Ant stupidity—Unfair comparisons—The ant and
      the servant-maid—Mushroom-growing beetles—Choked by
      ambrosia—Intelligent uselessness—Automatic phraseology—A
      curious insect.

ANTS, as everybody knows, have a special faculty for doing extraordinary
things. Only a few of these have been mentioned in the last and
preceding chapters, and only a few more can be touched upon in this. To
do the subject anything like justice, a whole large book would be
required, not a few chapters merely of a quite small one. What ants do,
indeed, reminds me of the refrain, constantly repeated, of a certain old
ballad lately brought to my notice, viz.—

           “Wonders, notable wonders! never the like was heard.”

For instance, they grow mushrooms (rice, or some cereals, they used to
grow and reap, but lately they have not been allowed to); they use their
own larvæ as an implement to sew or stick things together with, thus
making little shuttles of them; they make bridges of their own bodies,
by which they pass over rivers—even wide ones, it would seem, at least
for them—which otherwise would be impassable; they allow themselves to
be made into honey-pots and kept full for the good of the general
community, who take a little of them when they want it; they have
cemeteries, and would appear even to feel something like awe or respect
in the presence of their own dead; they cause certain plants to grow and
come to maturity, which would otherwise die, in order to make a house in
them, and so on and so on, many other wonders equally notable, to say
nothing of those which have already been recounted.

To take the first on the list—I hardly believe in a classification of
wonders—Belt, who was an engineer, but ought to have given up his whole
life to observations of this sort, was the first, I believe, to find out
that ants were mushroom-growers. Like others, when he came to Nicaragua
he saw the leaf-cutting ants passing in long, double columns backwards
and forwards between their nests and the trees, the homeward-bound
column laden with their little crescent-shaped bits of green leaf, the
outgoing one empty-handed. “The first acquaintance a stranger generally
makes with them,” says Belt, “is on encountering their paths on the
outskirts of the forest crowded with the ants; one lot carrying off the
pieces of leaves, each piece about the size of a sixpence, and held up
vertically between the jaws of the ant; another lot hurrying along in an
opposite direction empty-handed, but eager to get loaded with their
leafy burdens. If he follows this last division, it will lead him to
some young trees or shrubs, up which the ants mount; and where each one,
stationing itself on the edge of a leaf, commences to make a circular
cut, with its scissor-like jaws, from the edge, its hinder feet being
the centre on which it turns. When the piece is nearly cut off it is
still stationed upon it, and it looks as though it would fall to the
ground with it, but on being finally detached the ant is generally found
to have hold of the leaf with one foot, and soon righting itself, and
arranging its burden to its satisfaction, it sets off at once on its
return. Following it again, it is seen to join a throng of others, each
laden like itself, and, without a moment’s delay, it hurries along the
well-worn path. As it proceeds, other paths, each thronged with busy
workers, come in from the sides, until the main road often gets to be
seven or eight inches broad, and more thronged than the streets of the
city of London. Standing near the mounds, one sees from every point of
the compass ant-paths leading to them, all thronged with the busy
workers carrying their leafy burdens. As far as the eye can distinguish
their tiny forms, troops upon troops of leaves are moving up towards the
central point and disappearing down the numerous tunnelled passages. The
outgoing empty-handed hosts are partly concealed amongst the bulky
burdens of the incomers, and can only be distinguished by looking
closely amongst them.”[60]

It used to be supposed that these leaves themselves, in a decaying
state, were the food of the ants, whilst another theory was that they
were used to make a sort of underground roof to the nest with. Belt’s
discovery took everybody—including himself—completely by surprise. “I
believe,” he says, “the real use they make of them is as a manure, on
which grows a minute species of fungus, on which they feed: that they
are in reality mushroom growers and eaters”;[60] and he thus narrates
the circumstances which led him to this conclusion:—

“When I first began my warfare against the ants that attacked my garden,
I dug down deeply into some of their nests. In our mining operations we
also, on two occasions, carried our excavations from below up through
very large formicariums, so that all their underground workings were
exposed to observation. I found their nests below to consist of numerous
rounded chambers, about as large as a man’s head, connected together by
tunnelled passages leading from one chamber to another. Notwithstanding
that many columns of the ants were continually carrying in the cut
leaves, I could never find any quantity of these in the burrows, and it
was evident that they were used up in some way immediately they were
brought in. The chambers were always about three-parts filled with a
speckled brown flocculent, spongy-looking mass of a light and loosely
connected substance. This mass, which I have called the ant-food, proved
on examination to be composed of minutely subdivided pieces of leaves,
withered to a brown colour and overgrown and lightly connected together
by a minute white fungus that ramified in every direction throughout
it.”[60] Belt assured himself in many ways, but not through actually
seeing them do so, that this fungus was what the ants fed on, and he
adds, “that they do not eat the leaves themselves I convinced myself;
for I found near the tenanted chambers deserted ones filled with the
refuse particles of leaves that had been exhausted as manure for the
fungus, and were now left, and served as food for larvæ of
_Staphylinidæ_ and other beetles.”[60]

Belt’s conclusions have been since amply verified, and the actual
process of preparing the leaves and laying down the mushroom-beds, as
well as the clipping and—if I mistake not—eating of the mushrooms, has
been observed. Herr Möller—a German observer who resided for some years
in tropical America—is usually referred to in this connection; but such
extracts from his writings as I have come across are to me less
_convincing_ than the following account of Mr. Edward Tanner, which is
contained in the _Journal of the Trinidad Field Club_.[61] The
observations were made with ants in confinement, as were Herr Möller’s
also, I believe. “Each forager,” says Mr. Tanner, “drops her portion of
leaf in the nest, which is taken up as required by the small workers,
and carried to a clear space in the nest to be cleaned. This is done
with their mandibles, and if considered too large, it is cut into
smaller pieces. It is then taken in hand by the larger workers, who lick
it with their tongues. Then comes the most important part, which is
almost always done by the larger workers, who manipulate it between
their mandibles, the ant using her palpi, tongue, three of her legs, and
her antennæ while doing so. It now becomes a small, almost black ball,
varying in size from a mustard-seed to the finest dust-shot, according
to the size of the piece of leaf that has been manipulated, which varies
from ⅛ by ⅛ to ¼ by ¼ of an inch. These balls, really pulp, are then
built on to an edge of the fungus-bed by the larger workers, and are
slightly smoothed down as the work proceeds. The new surface is then
planted by the smaller workers with slips of the fungus brought from the
older part of the nest. Each plant is planted separately, and they know
exactly how far apart the plants should be. It sometimes looks as if the
plants had been put in too scantily in places, yet in about forty hours,
if the humidity is regulated, it is all evenly covered with a mantle as
if of very fine snow. It is this fungus they eat, and with small
portions of it the workers feed the larvæ.”

The statement herein contained that the ants plant the new portion of
their mushroom-bed with slips or plants taken from the already growing
fungus is, as far as I know, new. I do not remember it in Herr Möller’s
paper,[62] who speaks of the _hyphæ_ of the fungus growing through and
round the little leaf-balls within a few hours, but without reference to
their being planted, nor is it alluded to by Professor Wheeler, who has
studied the mushroom-growing ant—whether the same or a similar species I
know not—in Texas. Forel, again, speaking of an allied form in Colombia,
says, “The largest workers triturate the leaves”; and again, “the
medium-sized workers of the minim caste are for ever clipping the
threads of the fungus, which then develops the ‘Kohlrabi’ (the little
round swellings, that is to say), on which the ants feed.”[62] Possibly
this last may allude to the planting, but if so, it is the reverse of
clearly put. Professor Wheeler also alludes to this constant clipping of
the fungus, and sees in it the probable cause of the mutilation of the
antennæ of the little blind cockroaches that live with these ants and
take toll of their mushrooms.[63] But as these constitute the sole food
of their insect cultivators, it is natural that the latter should
frequently clip in order to eat them, and the clipping would, no doubt,
stimulate their growth. All this, however, is different from the actual
deliberate planting of the fungus on newly laid-down portions of the
bed—an act which would imply a very clear intention, and make the ants
farmers in the same way that we are. This, however, need not be the case
if they only lay down the beds, for these at one time probably
constituted their actual food, the crop of fungus being merely
incidental. But if the ants deliberately plant the fungus, then, indeed,
they must know precisely, in a human way, what they are about.

As we have seen, the leaves, from which, in their state of pulp, the
mushrooms spring, are stored up by the ants in large underground
chambers; but these mushroom-beds, or gardens, as they are often called,
are themselves a sort of nest, containing tunnels and chambers, and not
merely unformed heaps. It is in one or other of these chambers that the
queen ant of the nest resides, a majestic creature, almost an inch long,
but inflated both with pride and eggs to a disproportionate extent. Her
sons and virgin daughters, who will some day be queens themselves, keep
her company, whilst all about in the galleries and all over the broad,
flat surface of the garden, which resembles a large flattened sponge,
walk the different castes of workers, some large, some small, some
medium-sized, with a few big-headed soldiers here and there amongst
them, as though to keep the crowd in order. Whether they have really any
such duty assigned them we do not know, but they do not appear to do any
work, whilst the others are all busy at something, and the smaller
workers particularly keep threading the stalks and filaments of the
fungus in order to weed out any extraneous useless growth from amongst
it.[63]

It is a sad reflection—thus sighs Professor Wheeler—that so much ordered
energy, such apparent intelligence, should all be really due to—_what_
he does not seem to be quite certain about, not automatism entirely
perhaps, but if not, then semi- or demi-semi-automatism, tempered with
“psychic plasticity.” Against this view of the matter we have that of
Belt, who, after giving two instances, which came under his own
observation, of intelligent adaptation, on the part of ants, to meet
particular circumstances, exclaims, “Can it be contended that such
insects are not able to determine by reasoning powers which is the best
way of doing a thing, or that their actions are not guided by thought
and reflection?”[64] But then Belt was not provided with the term
“psychic plasticity,” and without it he could only infer intelligence
from any intelligent act.

Still it cannot be denied that a great many instances have been
given—noticeably in the case of “_our_ ants” by Sir John Lubbock[65]—in
which these paragons of insects have behaved very stupidly, or shall we
say—for why should a creature that cannot be intelligent be stupid
either?—with great “psychic _rigidity_”? Certainly such contradictions
are very puzzling, but I would suggest one way of trying to estimate
better the rigid type of ant intellect, which I believe to be absolutely
new, and that is to compare it not with one’s own brain—or Darwin’s—but
with that of a rigid type of person. It is wonderful what a difference
this might make in our conclusions. An ant, for instance, that is
unable, under some special circumstances, to get a thing down into its
nest, because it persists in holding or pulling it, in the way it has
always been accustomed to, or another that would rather be blown into
the water along a known road than leave it for a new one, makes a poor
figure in presence of the seven sages, or amidst a circle of senior
wranglers mentally called up for its confusion; but we should think,
rather, of some pin-headed servant-maid, setting an article of furniture
each morning in the place that, with evident intention, you have removed
it from overnight, or making up a larger and larger fire as the weather
gets warmer and warmer. One should think of the obstinacy with which
many people cling to old habits which changed times have made useless,
or even harmful, and of how numbers not only prefer inferior things they
are used to, to the most decisive improvements, but hate and revile such
improvements as though they were undeniable evils. Instances will occur
to everyone. I would rather not mention any for fear of alienating nine
out of every ten of my readers. We should think, also, of savages or
primitive, slow-moving peoples. What a great unadaptability, for
instance, did the Matabele show in their methods of encountering our
countrymen during the war, and throughout the rising; as also in that
rising itself, since it was against all those well-known blessings which
our empire confers upon savages.[66] It is to these less exalted levels
of human faculty that we should look when we seek to compare an ant’s
mind—when out of its usual set track—with our own, if we wish to do the
ant any justice. That we pursue an opposite plan is my own explanation
of many a partial verdict. To every experimenter in these directions
(who should happen to ask my advice) I would say, first, “Do you know,
or have you ever known, a really silly person?” and on his beginning, at
once, with “Yes, Mrs.” or “Miss” (as the case may be), I would strike in
peremptorily thus: “Then keep _her_—not Newton—in your mind as a
standard of comparison.”

That ants should intentionally cultivate mushrooms will appear wonderful
to everybody, and some will see in it the high-water mark of their
mental development, by whatever path it has been arrived at. It seems
natural to connect such doings with the fact that “in ants the cerebral
ganglia are of extraordinary dimensions, and in all the Hymenoptera
these ganglia are many times larger than in the less intelligent orders,
such as beetles.”[67] Yet the brain of an ant—“one of the most
marvellous atoms of matter in the world, perhaps more so than the brain
of a man”—is “not so large as the quarter of a small pin’s head.”[67] Of
what size, then, can a beetle’s be?—especially that family of beetles
which grow and cultivate mushrooms, just in the same way that ants do.
It would be suggestive—though I hardly know of what—should it be found
that, comparatively speaking, _they_ have no brain at all.

The beetles alluded to have been named, with reference to the particular
kind of mushrooms they grow, ambrosia beetles, though in what the great
superiority of these over those raised by the ants lies I do not know,
for no one appears to have tasted them. It has been agreed, however, to
call them ambrosia. “One of the most remarkable facts,” says Mr.
Froggatt, “is that each group of these beetles is associated with a
certain kind of ambrosia or fungus, notwithstanding that they are found
in different timbers. This substance is actually cultivated by the
mother beetle upon a carefully prepared layer or bed of wood-débris,
generally at the end of the gallery; but in others the ambrosia is grown
only in certain brood chambers of peculiar construction, whilst in
others again it is propagated in beds near the cradles of the
larvæ!”[68] When the latter hatch, they find a supply of celestial food
awaiting them, and can walk about the various galleries, feeding upon it
to their hearts’ content.

In other cases, however—that is to say, with other species—social
development has gone further, and, besides boring galleries, the
mother-beetle excavates a number of cells in their walls, like rows of
bedrooms opening out of either side of a passage. She does not, however,
quite finish her bedrooms, but, whilst they are still incomplete, lays
an egg in each, and when this hatches, the young beetle, then in its
larval state, takes up the task where she left off, and in time
completes it. All the while they are growing up the mother feeds the
young ones, and, between the intervals of doing so, stops up the
entrance to the cell with a “plug”—such is the word employed; “to what
base uses we may return, Horatio!”—of ambrosia. In time, when they have
acquired the full imago form, each female beetle flies away to make a
burrow and rear a family of her own, and in some species she is
accompanied in this marriage flight, as it may be called, by the male.
In others, however, the males are wingless, and remain in the burrow,
till, when their appointed time comes, they die. Whether the male, when
winged, assists the female in her mining operations I am not quite sure,
inasmuch as that point seems to be avoided in the accounts which I have
been able to consult, but the wingless male would not be able to do so,
as he would be left behind in the burrow when the female flew away to
found another colony.

The fungus, when it has once commenced to grow, increases very rapidly,
so that if the number of beetles in the nest is much diminished, as,
say, by some accident, the rest cannot eat enough to keep it down, and
so, it would appear, are suffocated. It is asserted, however, that when
the wingless males are deserted by the females, and would otherwise
perish in this way, they all collect together in a few of the galleries
and feast on the ambrosia there growing. By this means, we are told,
they “prolong for a time their useless existence”—an ungrateful way of
putting it, so it seems to me, as the poor things have already been
useful in a very indispensable manner, so that their existence as a
whole is anything but useless, and to separate a part of it from the
rest and carp at that is silly as well as ill-natured. But it is the
fashion to speak in this harsh way of the male insect, beginning with
the drone bee; whereas when the female has done all that _she_ can
do—which is often just to lay her eggs—nobody talks of _her_ useless
existence. Fashion is a curious thing, and ants, even if they be
automatons, are not the only creatures that do things automatically.

It is certainly very curious, if it be true, that the wingless male
beetles should, by thus congregating together in this way, and so saving
their lives, show more intelligence than the winged females, who, under
similar circumstances, are choked with their ambrosia, as the Duke of
Clarence was with his nectar in a malmsey-butt. It is true that with the
males the thing happens every year, whereas with the females it is only
accidental; but, in the particular circumstances, it is difficult to see
how inheritance can have had anything to do with it. Here, then, are a
particular family of beetles who live the same sort of social life that
ants and bees do, which discovery appears to have been made by a Mr.
Hubbard not so many years ago, and from whose paper on the subject all
the above particulars have been taken, though only through the medium of
various magazines, since even at the British Museum I was unable to get
the paper itself. So long ago, however, as 1844 a certain Herr Theo
Hartig “published an article on the ambrosia of _Xyleborno (Bostrichus)
dispar_, in which he showed that it was a fungus growth (_pilzrasen_),
and he named the fungus _Monilia candida_.” This statement is made by
Mr. Hubbard in his much more recent account. Not feeling perfectly
certain from it whether the origin, as well as the nature, of the
strange-named substance was not also divined by the German investigator,
I quote the reference in order not to do him a possible injustice, for
to me it seems that there have been few more interesting discoveries
than this of these ant-like, ambrosia-growing beetles. But why the ants
only grow mushrooms, thus allowing themselves to be enormously outdone
by an inferior insect, is more than I can understand.

And now a word of justice to these beetles. It might be supposed that,
by burrowing into trees, they caused the death of the latter, but this
is not really the case. Writing in _The Agricultural Gazette_ of New
South Wales for August, 1900, Mr. Froggatt, the Government Entomologist,
makes the following statement absolving _Xleborus_: “This curious little
beetle (_X. solidus_) is rather plentiful about Sydney, and is
frequently sent to us taken out of the trunks of fruit trees, which it
is supposed to have killed; but in all cases that have come under my
notice it has had nothing to do with the tree dying, but is attracted to
the tree as soon as it becomes sick, the bark begins to wither, and the
first symptoms of decay set in.” Mr. Froggatt adds: “The instinct that
leads these and other wood-boring beetles to a tree as soon as it is
sick is something marvellous; in the tropics I have collected many fine,
rare species upon the freshly cut tent-poles in our camp, attracted to
the wood, but otherwise seldom found in the bush.” This instinct would
seem to be a remarkably developed scent, though why a severed branch
should smell differently from the tree of which it but a moment before
made a part it is not easy to imagine. However, we cannot, without
evidence, attribute clairvoyance to beetles, and perhaps it is the cut
from which the scent emanates.

Another example of an insect which is neither an ant, bee, wasp, nor
white ant, but which yet may be said to live a true social life, is the
little creature which, under the name of _Psocus venosus_ and as
belonging to the order _Carrodentia_, will be familiar to everyone. It
is nearly related to the so-called book-lice, but lives in the open air,
“being seen,” says Mr. Leland Howard, “upon the trunks of trees, in
flocks numbering from twelve to forty or fifty individuals.”[69] These
browse together like a herd of miniature cattle on the various lichens
that embrace the bark, and these they nibble so closely that wherever
they move they leave a bare track behind them. Sometimes one family and
sometimes several are included in the herd, all ages and stages being
represented, from the wingless but free-moving larvæ to the winged imago
form. The latter, however, though they be thus provided, will not
readily forsake their young, but the whole of them, when alarmed, first
run all together, and then, if the cause of disquietude continue,
suddenly scatter as though in panic, and run hither and thither, in all
and every direction. When the danger seems over, they close up their
ranks again, and go on browsing as before.

The female _Psocus_ lays her eggs in little clusters of from fifteen to
twenty, and protects each cluster under a sort of dome or shield of
gnawed wood which she presses upon them so that they stick to it. She is
said to brood over the eggs, but this does not appear to mean that she
actually incubates them. Rather, she remains about, keeping watchful
guard till they are hatched, and then takes the young to find pasture,
walking at their head like a hen in front of her chickens. From such
beginnings as these it seems possible that the social life of ants has
been, in the course of ages, evolved and developed.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER XVI


    From wood to ambrosia—Wood-boring beetles—Rival claimants—Stag
      and other beetles—Metempsychosis—Flies with horns—Comical
      combatants—Female encouragement—The sacred Scarabæus—A
      beetle with a profession—Table companions—Old and new
      fallacies—From theft to partnership.

IT is, no doubt, through feeding on wood that the beetles we have been
considering came in time to feed on ambrosia. The particular fungus,
that is to say, which for some unaccountable reason has received this
name, appeared as a natural growth upon the walls of their tunnels, and
in time it came to be thought necessary, and its coming was arranged
for. By similar steps, probably, the leaves once carried as food to
their nests by the sauba ants, or cooshies, have become the soil merely
on which that food is grown; and so I have no doubt myself that even if
the present agricultural ants of Texas do not purposely sow and
afterwards reap the rice that springs up around the circular mound of
their domicile, their descendants will do so. Indeed, it seems rather
curious that, with such facilities for a gradual development, the habit
has not yet been acquired; and this is the chief reason which inclines
me to suspend judgment on the question, and wait for further
observations. Far from thinking the thing too wonderful, I wonder if it
be not the case. Such wonder, however, is for ants and not for beetles,
except, indeed, ambrosia beetles, who certainly merit it, though in an
opposite way. No other wood-borers of the order are anything but
wood-eaters, or, at any rate, if a few feed on fungus, as would not be
improbable, should it happen to appear, they have nothing to do with the
cultivation of it. The words “as far as we know,” however, must be added
to the foregoing statement. Numbers of beetles pass the larval and pupal
stage of their existence within the trunk of a decaying or even of a
perfectly sound tree, from which they issue after the final
metamorphosis has been made. Amongst these is our own stag-beetle, in
whom, that is to say in whose caterpillar, some suppose themselves to
see the _Cossus_ of the ancient Romans, which was as much appreciated by
them, and, no doubt, justly, as are earthworms by the Chinese. Others,
however, believe this to have been the large red meaty-looking
caterpillar of the goat-moth; and as the one conjecture is quite as
plausible as the other, the only, or, at any rate, the best way of
arriving at a conclusion would be to try them both—a simple plan which,
as far as I know, has not yet been adopted.

The stag-beetle—when of maximum size, that is to say, for it varies
amazingly in this respect—is much the largest beetle which this our
island possesses, but though, with its huge, antler-like jaws, it makes
a good perennial illustration for all books of popular entomology, its
merits seem to end there, for either there is nothing or nothing has yet
been observed particularly interesting about it. No doubt, if we look at
the matter from an absolute rather than a relative point of view, the
second of these two explanations is the correct one, for a creature has
only to be studied in order to become interesting; but as compared with
ants, bees, wasps, and many other insects, beetles, or, at any rate, the
vast majority of them, are not so very entertaining in their habits, and
the stag-beetle has no superiority in this respect to correspond with
its size and uncommon appearance. This appearance, however, is confined
to the male, who alone possesses the great branching mandibles on which
its greater size also is largely dependent. It would be natural to
suppose that these formidable weapons, as they certainly appear, stood
in relation to the combats of the males for the possession of the
females, yet it is often stated that the short, sharp pincers of the
latter, which can be made, it would seem—anyone who doubts may try—to
meet in the flesh, are really the more efficient of the two. Be this as
it may, it is not improbable that the stag-beetle’s jaws, since they are
very handsome, may have been developed less as weapons than as
ornaments, under the laws of sexual selection. Darwin, if I remember,
was doubtfully of this opinion, and he attributes many strange
projections and processes on the head or thorax of other beetles—as
notably that huge one with a snout like a weaver’s beam, called the
Hercules beetle—to the same agency. No use for this extraordinary trunk,
as one may term it, has as yet been discovered, but as the under portion
is covered with a thick matting of soft brown hairs, it would seem as
though it had some office to perform, unless indeed we suppose this
_chevelure_ to be likewise admired. A lesser, though still tremendous,
projection, starting from the head, as the other one does from the
thorax, is likewise unaccounted for, for though the two together make in
appearance a pair of uncouth and irregular pincers, they neither are,
nor apparently can be used in this way. Nothing appears to be known of
this strange creature’s habits, and the same may be said in regard to
most of the more remarkable-looking beetles of the world, as well as
those which are not so extraordinary in their appearance. The ways of
beetles, in fact, have been but little studied, and it is perhaps not
too much to say that if for every thousand that fill the show-cases in
museums we could know the life-history of one, we might with infinite
advantage, in exchange for this knowledge, throw the whole pin-forest of
them into the sea. In what light this fact, if true, exhibits the
labours of those naturalists—as the world calls them—who, living for
years amidst the life-teeming regions of the earth, have spent their
whole time in constantly killing and killing, coming home, at last, with
an acre of carcasses, to write a book containing hardly anything of
first-hand observation—the soul of natural history—I will not pause to
inquire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: THE HERCULES BEETLE.
The enormous beetle from which this illustration was drawn, though not a
particularly large specimen, is six inches long, and the upper jaw
measures three inches and a half.]

There are many other species of beetles, the males of which are
ornamented about the head and thorax with all sorts of knobs and
projections, so that, with some, one might think that a one-horned or
two-horned rhinoceros had undergone metempsychosis, as it is called,
that its soul, that is to say, had transmigrated into the body of an
insect, which latter had been fashioned so as fancifully to resemble its
old one. However, as this would be a downward journey, it is more
satisfactory to imagine that certain beetles have been “translated” into
rhinoceroses. As to these kinds of excrescences, Darwin believed them to
be of the nature of adornments, and since their owners—the males—have
not been seen to use them in warfare, and indeed do not appear to fight,
it is difficult to imagine any other _raison d’être_ for them. This
seems all the more likely because certain flies found in the Malay
Archipelago have likewise excrescences, which we have to call horns, and
these too are confined to the males, though it is hardly to be imagined
that they would fight in a manner to make them of service. These flies
must be most extraordinary creatures to look at. They have long legs,
which they draw together underneath them, so as to stand very high, and
their horns are not only conspicuous by their size and shape, but also
by being brightly coloured. Thus in one species they are a beautiful
pink with a light stripe down the centre, and bordered on each side with
black. In another the colours are yellow, black, and brown, and though
_Elaphomia cervicornis_ has to be contented with black, and pale tips,
yet his are the finest pair of all, being nearly as long as his body,
and branched so as to look like a pair of slender and delicate stag’s
horns. The other pairs are not like this, one of them being rather
club-shaped, and therefore less horn-like, whilst another has an
extraordinary resemblance to the antlers of an elk, which are broad and
palmated, so that _it_ is the _Elaphomia alcicornis_. Here, therefore,
are both horned beetles and horned flies who yet do not fight with their
horns, so that unless they serve as ornaments it would be a puzzle to
say what they do serve as; for as the male beetles do not fight, which
is the principal way in which male creatures, including man, show their
vigour, why should we suppose them to be more vigorous than the females?

In some other beetles, which do fight, the sexes do not differ
conspicuously, nor do their facial or other peculiarities appear to bear
any special relation to warfare. Thus “those curious little beetles, the
_Brenthidæ_” of the Malay Archipelago, have an extraordinarily long
snout—or rostrum, to talk entomologically—at the end of which come the
jaws and antennæ, and this rostrum is used by the female to bore holes
in decaying wood, where she afterwards deposits her eggs. The males,
however, do what they can with them as weapons, and Dr. Wallace has seen
two of them fighting together in a very comic manner. “Each,” he tells
us, “had a fore-leg laid across the neck of the other, and the rostrum
bent quite in an attitude of defiance, and looking most ridiculous.”[70]
On another occasion “two were fighting for a female, who stood close by
busy at her boring. They pushed at each other with their rostra, and
clawed and thumped, apparently in the greatest rage, although their
coats of mail must have saved both from injury. The small one, however,
soon ran away, acknowledging himself vanquished.”[70] _Lethrus
cephalotes_ is another fighting beetle, and here the males, instead of
horns or anything extraordinary, have merely somewhat larger mandibles
than the females. “The two sexes,” says Darwin, “inhabit the same
burrow. If, during the breeding season, a strange male attempts to enter
the burrow he is attacked; the female does not remain passive, but
closes the mouth of the burrow and encourages her mate by continually
pushing him on from behind; and the battle lasts until the aggressor is
killed or runs away.”[71]

Of yet another species, the _Ateuchus cicatricosus_, the sexes “live in
pairs, and seem much attached to each other; the male excites the female
to roll the balls of dung in which the ova are deposited, and if she is
removed he becomes much agitated. If the male is removed the female
ceases all work, and, as M. Brulerie believes, would remain on the same
spot until she died.”[72] But M. Brulerie was reckoning apparently
without M. Fabre, since whose investigations in this last department it
may be said that “_nous avons changé tout cela_.” For this _Ateuchus_ is
none other than the celebrated Scarabæus, or sacred beetle, and, in the
first place, M. Fabre has shown that the balls of dung, which are rolled
about by them with so much perseverance and energy, do not contain the
ova, as it was always thought that they did, but are merely provender
and nothing more, and though sometimes they are rolled by two beetles
together, these are not the male and female, or, at any rate, they need
not be. They are just as likely to be two males or two females, and in
any case, though the two may be of opposite sexes, they do not represent
a mated pair. Simply when the two—if, as is by no means always the case,
more than one take part in the rolling—have pulled and pushed the ball
to a suitable place, they make a hole in the ground, into which they
drag it, and, having closed the aperture, sit and feast at their
leisure.

According to Fabre the vital principle contained in the egg would be
destroyed were it rolled about in this fashion, so when the mother
Scarabæus, who, it would appear, works in this matter alone, is ready to
lay her eggs, she first makes an excavation, and then brings the dung
down into it in pellets, till there is a heap of it, which fills the
whole concern. Then “the first thing to do is to select very carefully,
taking what is most delicate for the inner layers, upon which the larva
will feed, and the coarser for the outer ones, which merely serve as a
protecting shell. There around a central hollow which receives the egg
the materials must be arranged layer after layer, according to their
decreasing fineness and nutritive value; the strata must be made
consistent, and adhere one to another; and finally the bits of fibre in
the outside crust, which has to protect the whole thing, must be felted
together.”[73]

Thus, when the grub first issues from the egg, it finds light digestible
food ready to hand, which becomes coarser and more fibrous with its
growth and increased capacity of assimilating such stronger diet. As
more and more is eaten, the ball, which is about the size of an ordinary
apple, becomes hollower and hollower, till at last, when only the outer
crust remains, the grub is ready to enter upon that wonderful series of
changes—called its metamorphoses—which will bring it forth into this
larger ball of dirt, a complete beetle, with a useful profession, that
of scavenger, immediately open to it.

Thus a fallacy which, according to Fabre, dates from the time of the
Pharaohs, viz. that every ball of dung which one might at any time see a
Scarabæus beetle rolling and trundling along contained its egg, has been
finally disposed of, nor is this the only one. It used to be thought,
not only that any two beetles rolling a ball between them were male and
female, but also that any single one that happened to be in difficulties
would immediately fly off and summon a comrade or two to its aid. Fabre
denies this altogether, and maintains that in this rolling away of
provisions each individual beetle is purely a self-seeker. It is true,
as we have seen, that the _bonne bouche_ will often be eaten by two
Scarabæi—never more—in the cavern prepared beforehand for its reception,
but, according to Fabre, this is only because it is to the mutual
interest of both to act in this way, since neither can succeed in
appropriating the ball to itself, in spite of efforts—which in other
cases, however, may be successful—to do so.

In all such cases the one beetle is the real owner of the ball, whilst
the other is only there with the intention of stealing it if he can.
Thus the thief will often let himself be pushed along by the honest
worker, lying flat on the ball, and doing no work whatever, though at
other times, when a rise in the ground makes it difficult for a single
beetle to roll it, he will assist with all his power. Again, whilst the
one Scarabæus is hollowing out a cave for the approaching banquet to
take place in, the other, left with the ball, will, after some time,
begin to go off with it alone, and unless pursued by the owner before he
has gone too far, he accomplishes his purpose, and eats it all himself.
Thus he has associated himself to the maker of the ball with the
distinct idea of stealing it if he can. He has this plot in his mind, to
pretend partnership, to even give real assistance, but to watch his
opportunity and decamp when it occurs. That, at least, is the view
suggested for our adoption, but I cannot say that it recommends itself
to me. Fabre, in my opinion, has disposed of one error only to fall into
another of precisely the same kind. He says very justly in regard to the
idea that one beetle would deliberately fly away and summon others to
its assistance, “It is no slight thing to admit that an insect has a
truly surprising grasp of the situation, and a facility for
communicating its ideas to others of its kind more surprising still. Are
we to suppose that a Scarabæus in distress conceives the idea of begging
for help, flies off, explores the country round, etc.?” Very true; but
if we are not to suppose this, I certainly will not suppose, either,
that this same Scarabæus can conceive the idea of pretending to assist
another in order to rob him of his property. This would be as deep a
laid scheme as the other, and the facts of the case, as given by Fabre
himself, do not appear to me to lend themselves to such an explanation.

The point of these interesting relations has been, in my opinion,
entirely missed. What we really see in them, or what, at least, is there
for us to see, is the beginnings of order and social polity, evolving
themselves out of lawlessness and the strong hand. Further, it has
already gone some little way, for the fact that two Scarabæi do, as a
matter of fact, assist each other very materially in rolling the ball,
and that they do sit and eat it together in the same chamber, are not to
be got over by any such amusing fancy picture as this brilliant writer,
as well as keen observer, has given us. It is no use fixing our eyes
upon that part of the conduct of the beetle which we are invited to call
the thief, in contradistinction to the owner—I doubt myself if Fabre has
always kept the two distinct from beginning to end—if we pass over the
other and much more interesting parts of it. Why does this beetle help
to get the ball up a hill, and why does he sit for some considerable
time with it outside the cave that the other is making, before he begins
to go off with it? Does he say to himself, in the first case, “If we
don’t get it to the right place, to begin with, he’ll never dig a hole
and leave me outside with it,” and, in the second, “I’ll wait till he
has come out and found it all right, several times, so that his
suspicions may be put to sleep”? This would be scheming with a
vengeance; but _serviteur Monsieur Fabre_, I must refer you to your own
incredulity in another matter. I will never accept such an explanation,
and the view which I take of the whole affair is this. The beetle which
Fabre calls the thief is under the sway probably of precisely the same
feeling as the other one—the rightful owner. He has seized a piece of
dung, and as he seizes it, whether another has it at the time or not, it
appears to be his, that being the only idea of rightful ownership which
is not too large for his comprehension. Finding, however, that another
beetle has exactly the same idea as himself, he is forced, willy
nilly—and the experience is being constantly repeated—to accommodate
himself to this circumstance and make the best of it. The ball—this is
the one great advantage—will continue to roll even if he does not push
it. Therefore he can afford to be lazy sometimes, and be pushed along
with it. The ball stops: in that case he must push it, and, even without
this incentive, it would appear from Fabre’s account that the two often
work together. Thus, from the very necessities of the case, it is
evident that a sense of partnership—at least a feeling of doing work in
combination with another—has begun to dawn in the mind of the Scarabæus.
The fact that when the one beetle is left alone with the ball, whilst
the other excavates, it does not immediately go off, but stays a little,
as though waiting to be rejoined, suggests to my mind that this feeling,
fostered by custom, has already gone some way, though it is not
wonderful that, after a time, the primitive individualistic tendency
should again assert itself. But when the fugitive is overtaken, it
assists the other to roll the ball back, and the end of it all is a meal
shared peacefully between the two, in one common apartment. If we
suppose that the instinct, or capacity, of working together for some
common end has had any beginning, surely we might expect to find it in
some such state of affairs as this. The result of primitive conceptions
is that two Scarabæi are often obliged to roll one ball between them,
and if there be any advantage in this arrangement, natural selection
will no doubt do the rest. That it has already begun to do it is, I
think, very probable; but Fabre was not an evolutionist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              CHAPTER XVII


    Do ants sow and reap?—Rival observers—The Texan _v._
      Macaulay’s schoolboy—More evidence wanted—How ants cross
      rivers—Tubular bridges—Ant armies—A world in flight—Living
      nests—Ants and plants—Mutual dependence—Nests in thorns and
      tubers—Ant honey-pots—Business humanity—Burial customs—A
      strange observation—Two views of ants.

MUSHROOM-GROWING, especially if the ants plant the mushrooms in the way
stated by Mr. Tanner, is just as extraordinary, I think, as their habit
of planting a field with ant-rice and reaping it at the proper time
would be, did they really practise it. Up to a little while ago it
certainly seemed as though they did, for there was Dr. Lincecum’s
definite statement based upon twelve years’ observation, and this, if
not confirmed by Mr. McCook, was, at any rate, not contradicted by him.
On the contrary, McCook mentioned a good many facts pointing in the
direction of Lincecum’s assertion, and though he did not consider them
decisive, he could see no reason why the ants should not act in this
way, as indeed there is none: so that as he had only stayed a few months
where Lincecum had lived for twelve years, he seemed like a weaker
witness supporting, according to his opportunities of observation, a
much stronger one. Now, however, comes another witness, whose
opportunities have also been great, and in a somewhat heavy-handed way,
in a spirit of myth-slaying and irrelevant reference to supposed
schoolboy knowledge, hardly required in face of all that ants are known
to do, denies the whole thing.

First, however, let us have the assertion as originally made by
Lincecum, which is, that on the summit of the mound of their nests, from
which they carefully clear away all other vegetation, the harvesting
ants sow the seed of a certain plant called ant-rice for the purpose of
subsequently reaping a harvest of the grain. It is sown in time for the
autumnal rains to bring up, and at the beginning of November a green row
or ring of ant-rice, about four inches wide, is seen springing up round
the circumference of the _disk_ (as the circular top of the mound is,
for some reason, always called). In the vicinity of this circular ring
the ants do not permit a single spire of any other grass or weed to
remain a day, but leave the aristida or ant-rice untouched until it
ripens, which occurs in June of the next year. After the maturing and
harvesting of the seed, the dry stubble is cut away and removed from the
disk, which is thus left unencumbered until the ensuing autumn, when the
same species of grass again appears as before, and so on.[74] After
stating in a letter to Darwin that he has seen all this taking place
year after year, Dr. Lincecum adds:—“There can be no doubt of the fact
that the particular species of grain-bearing grass mentioned above is
intentionally planted. In farmer-like manner the ground upon which it
stands is carefully divested of all other grasses and weeds during the
time it is growing. When it is ripe the grain is taken care of, the dry
stubble cut away and carried off, the paved area being left unencumbered
until the ensuing autumn, when the same ant-rice reappears within the
same circle and receives the same agricultural attention as was bestowed
upon the previous crop, and so on year after year, as I _know_ to be the
case in all situations where the ants’ settlements are protected from
graminivorous animals.”[75] Lincecum also believed that the ants were
able in some way to prevent the seed stored in their nests from
germinating. This same fact has been asserted, and apparently proved, by
Moggridge, in regard to the harvesting ant of southern Europe, and he
also states that, if in spite of the precaution any seeds begin to
sprout, the ants by gnawing off the tips of the radicles would prevent
the germination from proceeding.

This, then, is the case _for_ the harvesting ant, as we may say; for if
these things be true they are certainly much to its credit, whereas, if
not, the scandal is so great that it ought to change its name. Let us
now hear the case against, as stated by Professor Wheeler, after which
readers may make up their minds, if they can, for I have not quite done
so yet. I quote in full, so that the two statements may be balanced
against each other, and this, I hope, will be more interesting than the
usual “Mr. So and So, however, disputes this and thinks, etc.”—another
line or two in which the contrary proposition of the one before is
stated at about the same length. This is what Professor Wheeler, who
“speaks home—you may relish him more (or at least as much) in the
soldier as the scholar”—has to say: “It may not be altogether out of
place in this paper to record a few other observations on _Pogonomyrmex
molifacieus_, inasmuch as this form has been singled out among all the
known members of the genus as presenting certain remarkable instincts.
Lincecum is responsible for the myth that this _Pogonomyrmex_ sows a
certain species of grass, the ‘ant-rice’ (_Aristida oligantha_),
protects it from harm and frees it from weeds while it is growing, for
the purpose of reaping the grain. This notion, which even the Texan
schoolboy (not Macaulay’s, who probably knew as much about it) has come
to regard as a joke, has been widely cited, largely because the great
Darwin stood sponsor for its publication in the Journal of the Linnean
Society. McCook, after spending a few weeks in Texas observing the ant
in question and recording his observations in a book of 310 pages,
failed to obtain any evidence either for or against the Lincecum myth
and merely succeeded in extending its vogue by admitting its
plausibility. Two years of nearly continuous observation enable me to
suggest the probable source of Lincecum’s and McCook’s misconceptions.
In either case the observer has started with a few facts, and has then
stopped short to draw inferences before gathering more facts. If the
nests of _Molifacieus_ be studied during the cool winter months—and this
is the only time to study them leisurely and comfortably, since the cold
subdues the fiery stings of their inhabitants—the seeds which the ants
have garnered in many of their chambers will often be found to have
sprouted. It is, therefore, certain that these ants are not able to
prevent the seed from germinating, as Moggridge claims for the European
species of Messar, except by conveying them to drier chambers; and in
protracted spells of wet weather even this precaution seems to be of no
avail. On sunny days the ants may often be seen removing these seeds
when they have sprouted too far to be left for food, and carrying them
to the refuse heap, which is always at the extremity of the cleared
earthern disk or mound. In this place the seeds thus cast away as
inedible often take root, and, somewhat later, form an arc of tall grass
more or less closely approximating to a complete circle round the nest.
Since these ants feed largely, though by no means exclusively, on
grass-seeds, and since these particular seeds are a very common and
favourite article of food, it is easy to see how their grass should
often predominate in the circle. In reality, however, only a small
percentage of the nests, and only those situated in certain localities,
present such circles. Now to state that the ant, like a provident
farmer, sows this cereal, and guards and weeds it for the sake of
garnering its grain, is as absurd as to say that the family cook is
planting and maintaining an orchard when some of the peach-stones which
she has carelessly thrown into the backyard, with the other kitchen
refuse, chance to grow into peach trees.”[75] Certainly such a thing
should have been observed before the statement was made, and, if it has
not been, the facts seem more probably accounted for on the above
explanation.

Professor Wheeler goes on to say that “there are several other facts
which show that the special ring of grass about the nest is an
unintentional and inconstant result of the activities of the ant colony.
For instance, one often finds very flourishing ant-colonies that have
existed for years in the midst of much-travelled roads, or in stone
side-walls, often a hundred or more feet from any vegetation whatever
(without any ant-rice on their mounds therefore). Again, it is very
evident that even a complete circle of grass like those described by
Lincecum and McCook would be entirely inadequate to supply more than a
very small fraction of the grain necessary for the support of a
flourishing colony of these ants. Hence they are always obliged to make
long trips into the surrounding vegetation, and thereby wear out regular
paths, which radiate in different directions, often to a distance of
forty to sixty feet from the entrance of the nest. The existence of
these paths, which are often found in connection with grass-encircled
nests, is alone sufficient to disprove Lincecum’s statements.”[75] It
certainly seems easier to suppose that Lincecum misinterpreted certain
facts, not themselves in dispute, than that an explanation on which so
many considerations seem to throw doubt is the correct one. One thing,
at least, seems certain—if some of these ant communities grow grain of
set purpose, all of them do not. This may be possible, but more proof of
it than Lincecum has brought is demanded. If the ants really sow and
reap the grain that grows upon their mounds, and, more especially, if
they carefully keep the patch clear, it ought not to be difficult to see
them doing so. This last would be decisive, whereas the other two are by
no means so.

That ants should use their own larvæ like a shuttle, and for the same
purpose, seems as strange a thing as one can well imagine, but there is
no doubt at all about it, the act having been witnessed on various
occasions by competent observers, whose evidence is mutually
corroborated. The species in question is common in Eastern Asia, and is
accustomed to make little houses or arbours for itself by bending leaves
round so that the edges meet, and then fixing them together, as some
caterpillars do. Now the larva can do something which the grown ant
cannot, which is to spin a cocoon from a sort of gummy, thread-like
substance which issues from the mouth. Whilst one group of ants
therefore join to keep the leaf bent in the proper position, another
take each a larva in their jaws, and pass it from edge to edge of the
leaf, applying its mouth to each edge, until the two are bound firmly
together.[76] Whether this is a more or less remarkable habit than
growing mushrooms it would be difficult, perhaps, to decide, nor is
there any need to try, since such questions are more interesting left
uncertain.

It is well known, or at least credibly asserted, that ants cross rivers
by clinging one to another from the branch of a tree overhanging the
water, till the end of this living chain, as it becomes longer and
longer, is carried by the force of the current to the opposite bank,
where a bridge is formed, over which the main body marches.[77]
According to Du Chaillu the ants in Africa make, not only a bridge, but
a tunnel—“a high, safe tubular bridge through which the whole vast
regiment marches in regular order.”[78] These are the celebrated driver
or bashikouay ants, who, when upon their terrible marauding marches, put
every living creature, including man, to flight, though for many flight
is in vain. Size and strength are here no protection. “The elephant and
gorilla fly before them; the black men run for their lives.” So says Du
Chaillu, and, sure enough, when the skins of some of the poor gorillas
he shot arrived in England, several of these ants were found amongst the
hair.[79] In the forests of equatorial Africa, abounding—if they have
not all been shot by this time—with large animals, these hunting-raids
must give rise to some stirring scenes. What crashings through the trees
and undergrowth! What uncouth sounds, perhaps, of mingled pain and rage!
How a bitten gorilla would express himself! What a subject for a picture
if a herd of elephants, a few families of gorillas, a score or so of
lions, with a few leopards, and baboons, perhaps a rhinoceros, and any
number of antelopes, were all to come rushing down together to where an
artist stood ready for them! I should like to see the picture he would
draw.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The greatest beasts of the forest will fly before these terrible little
                                 insects,
              one of which is shown in the left-hand corner.

A more remarkable sight even than an ant-bridge is perhaps an ant-nest,
by which I mean, not an ants’ nest in the ordinary sense of the term,
but a nest made of ants. The following quotation from the
much-containing _Naturalist in Nicaragua_, page 25, will explain this
hard saying. “They make their temporary habitations in hollow trees, and
sometimes underneath large fallen trunks that offer suitable hollows. A
nest that I came across in the latter situation was open at one side.
The ants were clustered together in a dense mass like a great swarm of
bees hanging from the roof, but reaching to the ground below. Their
innumerable long legs looked like brown threads binding together the
mass, which must have been at least a cubic yard in bulk, and contained
hundreds of thousands of individuals, although many columns were
outside, some bringing in the pupæ of ants, others the legs and
dissected bodies of various insects. I was surprised to see in this
living nest tubular passages leading down to the centre of the mass,
kept open just as if it had been formed of inorganic materials. Down
these holes the ants who were bringing in booty passed with their prey.”
Of the many curiously constructed or strangely produced dwellings of
ants, this made out of their own bodies is amongst the most remarkable.

Many ants live in the interior of various plants. The plant generally
benefits as much as the insect by this arrangement, so that there is a
mutual dependence between the two, which in some cases is carried to
such an extent that the life of one or both seems a necessary part of
that of the other. In Borneo, for instance, a certain large tuber which
grows on the branches of aged trees is always found inhabited by a
certain red ant, of small size, but fierce disposition, which rushes out
and attacks anyone who ventures at all near its dwelling. The seed of
this tuber is disseminated in the same way as is our own mistletoe,
through the agency of birds, that is to say, the seed being surrounded
by a similar pulpy mass, which adheres to the branch on which it falls.
Soon after germination the tuber, which is shaped something like a
carrot, begins to develop, but whilst still quite small its growth
ceases and in this state it would remain, and before long, die, if it
should not happen to be found by the ants in question. If it should be,
however, its life is assured. They immediately bore a hole at the base
of the stem, upon which this enlarges to a great degree, so that soon
there is room for them to excavate galleries in the cellular tissue of
the interior, and to form a populous colony. The whole tuber is soon
perforated in all directions, and becomes a living and growing
formicarium, the great accretion of cellular tissue which has made this
possible having been caused by the poison—if we may call it so—of the
ant’s bite, in the same way as the sting of the gall-fly raises galls
upon the oak.[80] Of course, from the moment that the ants appear the
tuber is safe from any other insect, or small bird, or mammal that might
otherwise do it harm. The ants in defending their nest would defend it,
and it is on this principle of mutual advantage that such ant and plant
alliances have been brought about.

Thus the dry, arid plains, called savannahs, of tropical America support
a species of acacia of which the thorns, characteristic of the family,
grow in pairs and are shaped exactly like the horns of some oxen. Every
pair of these horns becomes in time an ants’ nest, and if the tree be
touched or shaken, the ants rush out full of fury in defence of their
habitations. Thus every tree is tenanted by a large army of retainers,
who almost more than the thorns themselves, which have been developed
for the same purpose, protect it against browsing quadrupeds. Its
thorns, however, would be no protection against the leaf-cutting ants in
search of materials for their mushroom-beds, whereas these are kept at
bay by a hostile species, smaller indeed, but armed with a powerful
sting. “For these services,” says Belt, “the ants are not only securely
housed by the plant, but are provided with a bountiful supply of food;
and to secure their attendance at the right time and place, this food is
so arranged and distributed as to effect that object with wonderful
perfection. The leaves are bi-pinnate (double, that is to say), and at
the base of each pair of leaflets, on the mid-rib, is a crater-formed
gland, which, when the leaves are young, secretes a honey-like liquid.
Of this the ants are very fond; and they are constantly running about
from one gland to another to sip up the honey as it is secreted. But
this is not all; there is a still more wonderful provision of solid
food. At the end of each of the small divisions of the compound leaflet
there is, when the leaf first unfolds, a little yellow, fruit-like body,
united to it by a point at its base. Examined through a microscope, this
little appendage looks like a golden pear. When the leaf first unfolds
the little pears are not quite ripe, and the ants are continually
employed going from one to another examining them. When an ant finds one
sufficiently advanced it bites the small point of attachment; then,
bending down the fruit-like body, it breaks it off and bears it away in
triumph to the nest. All the fruit-like bodies do not ripen at once, but
successively, so that the ants are kept about the young leaf for some
time after it unfolds. Thus the young leaves are always guarded by the
ants; and no caterpillar or larger animal could attempt to injure them
without being attacked by the little warriors.” Thus, as Mr. Belt very
aptly puts it, “the ants are really kept by the acacia as a standing
army to protect its leaves from the attacks of herbivorous mammals and
insects.”[81]

As for the honey or honey-pot ants, they were first heard of in America,
and various floating stories, which seemed more or less hard to credit,
having got into circulation about them, without there being any positive
knowledge to check them, Dr. McCook, to remove this grave reproach to
transatlantic entomology, started off one day to observe them. He soon
found that the main fact which had been stated was correct, viz. that a
certain sect or caste of these ants, disregarding the Italian warning,
were in the habit of making themselves all honey, to be swallowed in
consequence by the rest of the community. These are the so-called
honey-pots, and so well do they deserve their name, that when full the
abdomen becomes almost perfectly circular, like a glass globe, and so
enormously swollen that the body in proportion to it is like a grain of
wheat stuck into a cherry or gooseberry.[82] The legs dangle towards the
ground, but hardly, or only by a great effort, reach it, and in this
last state of distension the insect may find it impossible to get about,
though as a rule by dragging or pushing herself along sideways, she is
able to do so to a certain extent. These honey-jars have special
chambers for their accommodation, and here they hang in clusters from
the roof, awaiting the visit of any worker, who upon signifying his
wants—it would seem after climbing up to them—is fed, after the ordinary
ant manner, by regurgitation. In the same way the honey-bearers are
themselves filled, or more properly speaking, feed themselves, since the
mouth arrangement, in spite of the direction in which things seem
hastening, has not yet become so simple as in the case of a real jar.

The honey which the rotunds, as McCook calls them, receive from the
workers is gathered at night, and is obtained almost entirely from the
galls of oak trees, which, when pierced by the ant’s mandibles, exude a
white transparent liquid in minute globules. This is greedily licked up
by the ants and distributed by them after the return home, not only to
the rotunds, but to such of their fellow-workers as may not have taken
part in the expedition.[83] The honey thus obtained is pleasant to ant
and human taste alike, and the Indians of New Mexico, as no doubt
elsewhere, obtain it by the simple process of squeezing the
insect—breaking the honey-jar, as one may say. They also make from it a
fermented liquor having intoxicating powers, so that one need not wonder
that the idea of farming the honey-ant, like the honey-bee, has been
seriously discussed in the United States. McCook, however, has pointed
out that “the limited quantity of the product would prevent a profitable
industry,” and he adds: “Besides, the sentiment against the use of honey
thus taken from living insects, which is worthy of all respect, would
not be overcome.”[83] Personally I think it would be overcome, and
pretty quickly, too, as are most other sentiments that stand in the way
of pleasure or profit. Women would get it under first, as in the case of
birds, seals, etc., and the world would soon follow, with “woman’s
influence” upon its lips. But let me not be unjust. I do not believe in
sentiment as a working force in the case at all. If the ants are not to
be squeezed it will be on commercial considerations.

That the worker-ants—and for that matter the others also—are extremely
fond of the honey so curiously stored by them, will be easily believed,
and an unpleasant illustration of their greediness in this respect was
often observed by McCook when capturing a nest. The swollen bodies of
the rotunds, on these occasions, were sometimes unavoidably ruptured,
whereupon such workers as happened to be near these unfortunates,
forgetting their alarm, which had hitherto been great, and the ruin and
confusion all around them, paused in their flight, or aimless movements,
and greedily lapped up the overflowing honey.[84] It is all the more
interesting, therefore, to learn that when the “little life” of these
poor honey-pots is at length “rounded with a sleep,” their contained
treasure, though so easily obtainable, goes with them to the grave, the
idea of opening the full crop, and imbibing the contents, never seeming
to occur to any ant. This is all the more remarkable in that the
workers, when they recognise that life is extinct, carefully separate
the abdomen from the thorax by sawing through, with their mandibles, the
little connecting stalk called the petiole. The two parts are then
removed separately, that representing the head half being carried,
whilst the “golden bowl” of the body “unbroken,” though with “the spirit
fled for ever,” is rolled along the various chambers and galleries of
the nest, till it finally finds a resting-place in the cemetery just
beyond its precincts.[84] To what are we to attribute the
non-utilisation of the honey in the dead body? Even were it possible
that the ants could forget that it was there, they cannot be unconscious
of what must be smelt, as well as seen, through the semi-transparent
walls of the abdomen. Some feeling must restrain them—what, I am not
prepared to say in a work which does not aim at being scientific.

Here, then, we have one most suggestive illustration—“suggestive,” I
think, is a very useful word—of the funeral habits of ants. Many others
could be instanced, but I will end this chapter, and small account of
ant doings, generally, with the following extract from the _Proceedings
of the Linnæan Society_ (1861). The observer was a Mrs. Hutton, of
Sydney; and Romanes, who quotes her account in his _Animal
Intelligence_, remarks that though she is not a well-known observer the
facts reported were such as scarcely to admit of a mistake. Personally,
I attach no weight whatever to anybody’s not being known as an observer.
Want of leisure, or unpropitious circumstances generally, must prevent
large numbers of people from seeing what they would be very well able to
note accurately if they did, or from recording what they do see; whilst,
on the other hand, leisure, joined to taste in a certain direction,
makes many a quite average observer known as a good one. A good
observer, in fact, is rather one who is always keeping on, and does not
weary, than one who can see a single salient thing more plainly than
most other people; and, again, it is easy to set a fictitious value
merely on being before the public.

Having thus defended Mrs. Hutton, I proceed now to quote her account: “I
saw,” she says, “a large number of ants surrounding the dead ones”
(soldier ants which she had herself killed and left lying on the ground
some half-hour previously), “and determined to watch their proceedings
closely. I followed four or five that started off from the rest towards
a hillock a short distance off, in which was an ants’ nest. This they
entered, and in about five minutes they reappeared, followed by others.
All fell into rank, walking regularly and slowly, two by two, until they
arrived at the spot where lay the dead bodies of the soldier ants. In a
few minutes two of the ants advanced and took up the dead body of one of
their comrades; then two others, and so on, until all were ready to
march. First walked two ants bearing a body, then two without a burden;
then two others with another dead ant, and so on, until the line was
extended to about forty pairs, and the procession now moved slowly
onwards, followed by an irregular body of about two hundred ants.
Occasionally the two laden ants stopped, and laying down the dead one,
it was taken up by the two walking unburdened behind them, and thus, by
occasionally relieving each other, they arrived at a sandy spot near the
sea. The body of ants now commenced digging with their jaws a number of
holes in the ground, into each of which a dead ant was laid, where they
now laboured on until they had filled up the graves. This did not quite
finish the remarkable circumstances attending this funeral of the ants.
Some six or seven individuals had attempted to run off without
performing their share of the task of digging; these were caught and
brought back, when they were at once attacked by the body of ants and
killed upon the spot. A single grave was quickly dug, and they were all
dropped into it.”

“Prodigious!” as Dominie Sampson would have said, and certainly I think
this is one of the most remarkable observations upon ants that has ever
been made. As far as the burying is concerned, it has been corroborated
by the Rev. W. Farrar White, who, at the same time, corroborates Pliny;
but how strange are all the circumstances! What was it, one wonders,
that made just a few of the crowd shirk their share of the labour—for
this is not like ants. Some strange, uncanny feeling in connection with
the dead bodies may be suspected; but seeing that, as the Russian
proverb truly says, “Another man’s soul is darkness,” it is not very
likely that we shall ever know what ants feel.

One interesting question is suggested in this connection, though I have
never known it raised yet. Two views of what ants are, excluding
compromises, may be taken—the automatic one, tempered with “psychic
plasticity,” of Professor Wheeler, and that formed by Mr. Belt, who,
having fully satisfied himself—from the keenest observation, be it
remembered—of their reasoning powers and capacities, remarks, “When we
see these intelligent insects dwelling together in orderly communities
of many thousands of individuals, their social instincts developed to a
high degree of perfection, making their marches with the regularity of
disciplined troops, showing ingenuity in the crossing of difficult
places, assisting each other in danger, defending their nests at the
risk of their own lives, communicating information rapidly to a great
distance, making a regular division of work, the whole community taking
charge of the rearing of the young, and all imbued with the strongest
sense of industry, each individual labouring not for itself alone, but
for all its fellows, we may imagine that Sir Thomas More’s description
of Utopia might have been applied with greater justice to such a
community than to any human society.”[85] Now, if Belt’s view be the
correct one, or if the evidence in favour of it be at all strong, is it
not time for us to ask ourselves, merely as a moral problem, how far we,
in our clumsy and imperfect human state, have a right to kill ants and
tumble Utopia to pieces, simply for our amusement, intellectual or
otherwise? Ought we to do this? Or ought we, like a lady who lives in
America and writes to very scientific papers, to imprison queens who do
no harm, and make ourselves learned at the expense of one, or both of
their antennæ, during the term of their natural lives? However simply
and sweetly we may talk of this, however much true womanly feeling may
enter into the narrative, nay, even though we give the queens pet names,
is it really right?

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XVIII


    Bees and wasps—A bee’s masonry—What happens to
      caterpillars—Living food—Variations in instinct—A wasp’s
      implement—Unreal distinctions—A cautious observer—Bees that
      make tunnels—A wonderful instinct—Leaf-cutting bees—Nests
      made of poppy-leaves—Born in the purple—Commercial
      philosophy—The appreciative white man—Economy of labour—Bees
      and rats—Busy shadows—A bee double.

THE consideration of ants naturally leads to that of bees, but of the
life and doings of the hive-bee—made common now in a hundred practical
treatises and bee-keeper’s manuals—it is not the design of this little
book to treat. Wasps are less written about, but even here, in a work
which can only deal with a very few insects out of a very great many, a
choice may be permitted one, so I will merely observe, in regard to the
common species, that in my opinion wasps are much less irascible than
bees—in fact, quite good-natured compared to them—but at the same time,
owing to their room-entering, table-pillaging propensities, much greater
nuisances, so that they deserve stern treatment, but a more charitable
estimate of their character. Hornets, again—which seldom offend in this
way—appear to me to be very peaceable insects, as though, wielding a
mighty weapon, they felt that they had no need to use it except on “a
striking emergency.” Such a definition would apply to the running of a
stage-coach, diligence, omnibus, waggon, etc.—in fact, any large
vehicle—into their nest on the highway, in which case the consequences,
one may well believe, would be appalling. Never having been in such a
position myself, and being without trustworthy information on the
subject, my powers of description are useless here, but there is a way
of dealing with this emergency also. This reminds me, however, of an
account which I have read somewhere or other of hornets having once
stopped a Roman army. This may seem surprising nowadays, but we must
remember that in classical times armies did not possess artillery. There
is therefore nothing invidious in the opinion which I here express, that
however much they may have stopped the Romans, they would never stop the
Japanese.

In both ants and bees we find solitary and social species, so as in ants
we have been considering the latter only, we will now reverse the
process with bees. There are many interesting species of solitary bees,
but it must be premised that the word “solitary” is to be understood
here in a special rather than in a general sense. As far as mere numbers
are concerned, there is often a large community of bees building their
cells in close proximity all at the same time, but each builds its cell
for itself alone, or rather for its family—no one thinks of helping its
neighbour. There is no co-operation, in fact, and that makes all the
difference. It would be all the same to every one of the bees that are
building so close together if all the rest went away and left it to work
alone. And yet we cannot even quite say this, because, in one case, at
any rate, though every individual bee makes its own cell and thinks only
of that and of its own family, yet, when all the cells are finished, the
whole community join in making one mud roof over the whole of them. By
this we see how difficult it is to find quite separate places for allied
animals, and how the habits of one are apt to slide gradually into those
of another. Still, we must do the best we can, and take words as we find
them, remembering that the locusts, as already explained, do _not_
belong to the _locustidæ_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Aelian, in his “Natural History,” says that a city in Crete
      was attacked by such a plague of hornets that the
      inhabitants were driven to abandon it, and build a new city
      on another site. A hornet is shown to the right of this
      inscription.

Amongst the best known of the solitary species of bees are the Carpenter
Bees, the Carding and Tapestry Bees, and the Mason Bees. Of the latter a
great French observer, who, though he lives now, belongs really to the
days of Réaumur and Swammerdam, has something to tell us. Speaking not
of Réaumur’s maison bee—that “splendid Hymenopteron with its dark violet
wings and costume of black velvet”[86]—but of a smaller
species—_Chalicodoma sicula_—he says: “You should see the active bee at
work when the road is dazzling white in the hot sunshine. Between the
neighbouring farm where she is building and the road where the mortar is
prepared there is a deep hum of the bees perpetually crossing each other
as they come and go. The air seems traversed by constant trails of
smoke, so rapid and direct is their flight. Those who go carry away a
pellet of mortar as big as small shot: those who come settle on the
hardest and driest spots. Their whole body vibrates as they scratch with
the tips of their mandibles and rake with their forefeet to extract
atoms of earth and grains of sand, which, being rolled between their
teeth, become moist with saliva, and unite. They work with such ardour
that they will let themselves be crushed under the foot of a passer-by
rather than move.”[86] Then comes the making of the actual nest, or
little collection of cells. “After choosing a boulder,” says Fabre, “she
comes with a pellet of mortar in her mandibles, and arranges it in a
ring on the surface of the pebble. The forefeet, and, above all, the
mandibles, which are her most important tools, work the material, which
is kept plastic by the gradually disgorged saliva. To consolidate the
unbaked clay, angular pieces of gravel as large as a small bean are
worked in singly on the outside of the still soft mass. This is the
foundation of the edifice. Other layers are added, until the cell has
the required height of three or four centimetres. The masonry is formed
by stones laid on one another and cemented with lime, and can stand
comparison with our own. Layers of mortar sparingly used hold them
together. The cell completed, the bee sets to work at once to store it.
The neighbouring flowers, especially those of _Genista scorpius_, which
in May turn the alluviums of the torrents golden, furnish sugared
liquids and pollen. She comes with her crop swelled with honey, and all
yellow underneath with pollen dust, and plunges head first into the
cell, where for some moments one may see her work her body in a way
which tells that she is disgorging honey. Her crop emptied, she comes
out, but only to go in again at once, this time backwards. With her two
hind feet she now frees herself from her load of pollen by brushing
herself underneath. Again she goes out, and returns head first. She must
stir the materials with her mandibles for a spoon, and mix all
thoroughly together. When the cell is half full it is stored; an egg
must be laid on the honey paste, and the door has to be closed. This is
all done without delay. The orifice is closed by a cover of undiluted
mortar, worked from the circumference to the centre. Two days, at most,
seem required for the whole work.”[86] Afterwards several more
cells—making a continuous group of from six to ten—are added, and when
all is completed, the mason bee “builds a thick cover over the whole
group, which, being of a material impermeable to water, and almost a
non-conductor, is at once a defence against heat and cold and damp. This
material is the usual mortar, made of earth and saliva, only with no
small stones in it. The nest is now a rude dome, about as big as half an
orange; one would take it for a clod of mud flung against a stone, where
it had dried. Nothing outside betrays its contents—no suggestion of
cells, none of labour. To the ordinary eye it is only a chance splash of
mud.”

Of course, when the eggs are hatched, the bee larvæ feed on the stored
pollen and honey, a pleasing picture which suggests another something
like it, though not altogether the same. I allude to certain species of
solitary wasps, which, urged by the same feelings of maternal
solicitude, choose a living caterpillar, grasshopper, spider, etc., for
the future sustenance of their young. Take, for instance, _Ammophila
urnaria_ of North America, whose habits in this respect have been
carefully studied. This wasp is about an inch long, with very long legs,
and a waist even exaggeratedly wasp-like. It is black in colour, but
with a red mark running round the fore part of the abdomen. At the
proper time she—for, of course, we are dealing with the female—may be
seen running about the ground, and eagerly searching the various plants
and grasses that come in her way. Occasionally, as though in lightness
both of heart and body, she gives a leap off the ground, and at other
times will fly up from it more deliberately, to make an examination of
some overhanging leaf. At last, as a result of these little aerial
excursions, let us say, she knocks down a certain green caterpillar of
the kind wanted, and with maternal devotion full upon her, at once sets
to work. The caterpillar, however, though taken by surprise, and
assaulted the instant it has touched the ground, resists strenuously, as
though instinctively knowing, and highly disapproving of, the fate in
store for it. It is larger and more bulky than the wasp, and its
contortions are so powerful that the latter is several times repulsed in
her assaults. She is not discouraged, however, but continues
perseveringly to fly at the caterpillar, till at last she takes it at a
disadvantage, possibly in a moment of weariness, and alighting with her
long legs on each side of the large, soft body, seizes it by the neck
with her mandibles, and holds it fast. Now the caterpillar, stimulated
doubtless by the painful, or at least unwelcome nip, struggles with
redoubled energy; but it is beneath its oppressor, who, straddling over
it and never relaxing her grasp, lifts it at last, with an effort, a
little from the ground, and inserting her curved abdomen like a fish
hook beneath it, strikes in a more effective and certain way than did
ever the most benevolently contemplative member of all the fishing
fraternity. The result is instantly apparent, for with the entry of that
deadly sting into its body, all struggles on the part of the caterpillar
cease, and it lies a living corpse at the feet of its cruel oppressor.
The latter, after remaining still for some moments as though to give her
victim time to realise and appreciate its situation, stings it again and
then again, each time choosing, as she has done before, for the locality
of the operation, the junction of two out of the dozen or so segments
into which the long length of the caterpillar is divided. Then she flies
up, but after circling a little above the scene of her triumph, she
descends again, and gives her victim, though now helpless and paralysed,
a taste or two more of her quality. The first part of her business is
now done, and well done. She has earned a rest, or rather she may
exchange one form of activity for another. Accordingly she proceeds to
indulge in the pleasures of the toilette, and it is not till this is
completely finished that she flies with, or drags, her victim to the
neat little burial-place, representing also her future nursery, which
she has already provided for it.[87]

The above illustration is taken from the account of a particular case
which fell under the keen observation of G. W. and E. G. Peckham, two
well-known American entomologists. On other occasions, however, this
wasp—that is to say, various individuals of the same species—besides
stinging the caterpillar, went through another and more curious process.
This consisted in biting and squeezing the anterior upper portion—the
neck as we may call it—of their victim.[87] The same operation was also
observed by Fabre when he watched his good mothers, but though I have
called it biting and squeezing, that is not the right term for a
_savant_ to employ. _He_ calls it malaxation, which, perhaps, means
doing both at the same time. Biting, however, would seem to imply no
less, but, perhaps in order to bite scientifically, it is necessary to
take a piece out, or at least to make the blood come, though in common
parlance this does not, or did not, hold good, since Sampson bit his
thumb at Abram and Balthasar, in the first scene of _Romeo and Juliet_,
but it cannot be supposed—nor does the context support such a view—that
he bit it so hard as that. Malaxation, however, let it be; but why such
a process on the part of the wasp should be necessary it is not easy to
see, since the mandibles are not poisonous like the sting, and the
latter is all in all sufficient to produce the paralysis required, as is
apparent in the instance already given, where the sting alone was
employed. To me it seems possible that this malaxation may be a
happiness to the wasp merely, as the shaking of a rat certainly is to a
terrier, whatever other advantages accrue from it. That insects, like
other animals, including man—who, indeed, is the crowning instance—take
a savage pleasure in overpowering and killing their prey, I have myself
very little doubt.

We have seen that this wasp stung the caterpillar between the segments
of its body, and, as we will assume—for the result seems to warrant the
inference—in the central part of it, so that the sting, entering the
great nervous cord or ganglion, which is situated in this region, with
little swellings at each of the segmental rings, produced the described
paralysis. It was Fabre’s view that this must always be the case, and he
thought likewise, in accordance with his own observation, that the
caterpillar received a sting at the junction of all or nearly all the
segments of its body. Otherwise it would be imperfectly stung, and in
consequence not sufficiently paralysed to prevent its struggling, and so
detaching the young larva, or perhaps the egg, which, as it would seem,
is laid on, and not inside, the body of its living provisions. On the
other hand, were the caterpillar stung too severely, so as to be killed
outright, the grub when hatched would only have putrid meat to feed
upon, and this again, it was assumed, would be fatal to its existence.
On these grounds Fabre concluded that we had here an instinct which must
have been perfect from the beginning, since as anything short of such
perfection would be followed by the death of the larva, those gradual
steps by which, on the theory of natural selection, all excellence
either of structure or instinct has been attained, could not in a case
like this have had any existence.

But all this has been exploded by subsequent observation. What Fabre saw
he knew, but in all that he inferred without seeing he was entirely
mistaken. As observed by the Peckhams, a caterpillar may be either stung
so slightly as to be quite lively, and yet not succeed in shaking off
the wasp larva hatched on its body, or so severely as to die almost
immediately, yet without detriment to the larva who feeds on its
discoloured and more or less putrified body, with the same gusto, and
apparent benefit, as though it were warm with life.[87] Thus the
question seems not so much to be, how can such perfection of instinct as
was observed by Fabre have been attained through the process of natural
selection, as why it should have been attained; or perhaps we may even
go further and ask if this supposed perfection exists at all, and
whether Fabre did not deceive himself. A wasp having secured a
caterpillar is, of course, at liberty to sting it as often as it
pleases. Why, then, should one wasp behave quite like another one in
this respect? Here, as elsewhere, there would be some amount—perhaps a
considerable amount—of variation in individual disposition, and wasps of
milder or less savage mood would sting less frequently than their
fiercer fellows. There might, therefore, as it appears to me, be a large
amount of fluctuation both in the number and degree of severity of the
stings—if indeed there is any regulation in this respect—and also in the
consequent injury to the caterpillar or other insect, without any
particular scope being offered for natural selection to play a part.
What room, indeed, for such a force can there be if it makes no
difference to the wasp-grub whether the caterpillar which is to be its
food, is stung badly or slightly, or whether it lives or dies?

That this is really the case seems to be implied in the following
paragraph which I quote from the same interesting work that I have
before referred to[87] “The conclusions that we draw from the study of
this genus differ in the most striking manner from those of Fabre. The
one pre-eminent, unmistakable, and ever-present fact” (the invariable
fact, as one might say) “is variability. Variability in every
particular—in the shape of the nest and the manner of digging it, in the
condition of the nest (whether closed or open) when left temporarily, in
the method of stinging the prey, in the degree of malaxation, in the
manner of carrying the victim, in the way of closing the nest, and last
and most important of all, in the condition produced in the victims of
the stinging, some of them dying and becoming ‘veritable cadavers,’ to
use an expressive term of Fabre’s, long before the larva is ready to
begin on them, while others live long past the time at which they would
have been attacked and destroyed if we had not interfered with the
natural course of events. And all this variability we get from the study
of nine wasps and fifteen caterpillars”![87] Fabre’s ideas therefore
seem totally disproved, but though natural selection—the counter-theory
to his own—has no doubt produced the _Sphex_ and _Ammophila_, with their
habit of stinging and storing caterpillars, to serve as food for their
young, it does not follow that it has done anything more than this; for
though variation be the stuff in which natural selection works, it need
not always work in it—any more than a tailor need always make clothes
because there is an abundance of cloth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the upper part of the picture a solitary wasp is seen
      attacking a caterpillar on a leaf. Beneath is another of the
      same species busy pounding the entrance to its burrow with a
      pebble.

In the digging and closing of her burrow—her nesting-habits, as we may
call them—our _Ammophila_ is almost as interesting to watch as in her
mode of proceeding with caterpillars, though here a certain well-known
stimulus to human enjoyment which I need not enlarge upon is wanting.
Having found a convenient spot for her nursery, she digs, with her
mandibles and front pair of legs, a little tunnel in the ground, to
about the length of her own body, and at the end of it hollows out a
round chamber or cavern just large enough to make comfortable quarters
for a pair of invalid caterpillars—a hospital for incurables, we may
call it to begin with, but soon to become their tomb. Having dug to
about her middle, the wasp backs out, with a little pellet of collected
earth held firmly in her mandibles. With this she flies to a little
distance and then, letting it drop, alights on the ground and takes a
little rest before returning to continue her work. She may either fly or
run back, for her legs are as highly developed as her wings—she is in
fact a very perfect athlete. The process of excavation is now continued,
there is more burrowing, more flying away with the earth dug out, and
before long the nursery-vault is completed. The next thing is to find
caterpillars for it, but before flying away to look for one, _Ammophila_
carefully conceals the entrance to her tunnel with pellets of earth,
which she often brings from a distance, and will not be satisfied with
unless they seem well adapted for their purpose. At last, when the
aperture is both blocked and hidden, she starts off upon the still more
important undertaking which has been already described, and after a
longer or shorter interval—if her quest is successful—returns with a
nicely stung caterpillar. As two are required there must be another
journey and another stopping up of the burrow, before the final one,
which is of a more solid nature, occupying, sometimes, as much as twenty
minutes. In thus bringing her labours to a conclusion, _Ammophila_ often
shows a wonderful degree of intelligent foresight—foresight we must term
it if we admit the intelligence; for sometimes she will drag a leaf over
the entrance to the tunnel, though now filled in, or taking a stone as
large as her head in her mandibles, will pound down the earth with it to
make it firm and compact.[87]

It used to be said—and may be still by that large class of people who
are for ever making false parallels and artificial distinctions—that man
was the only animal that made intelligent use of an instrument, but
Darwin instanced a monkey cracking a nut with a stone, and an elephant
breaking off a bough to fan itself with. Here, in an insect, we have a
case which is perhaps even more to the point—more extraordinary, that is
to say; for certainly the idea of flattening and pressing down earth
over a general surface, and of taking something to do it with, seems a
little less obvious than that of cracking a nut, in a similar manner,
and therefore to require more thought in the planner of such a process.
No wonder that the delighted witnesses of this interesting fact flung
themselves on the ground on each side of the unconscious inspirer of
their wonder, in order to have a better sight of it; but that a previous
observer of the same thing should have waited a year before publishing
what he had seen, because he feared such a statement would not be
believed,[87] is to my mind a display of prudence almost as wonderful,
though not nearly so edifying, as that of _Ammophila_ herself. If we are
not to make known what we see, because people who believe in their own
and nobody else’s eyesight are not likely to credit it, how is evidence
to accumulate for the benefit of the more intelligent part of the
community? It is only of this small minority that we should think, or,
rather, we should not think of anything but the truth, where truth is
concerned.

Returning to bees of the solitary kind, “the operations of the
wood-piercers,” says Bingley, “merit our careful attention.” They shall
have it for a moment, but space is against them. However, the female of
the species, _Xylocopa violacea_, which for some reason is disliked by
householders, bores in the springtime, by the aid of her strong
mandibles alone, neat little circular tunnels in such objects as
garden-seats, gates, front doors, arbours, window-shutters, rustic
tables, and the like. At first, it is stated, she “bores
perpendicularly, but when she has advanced about half an inch she
changes her direction, and then proceeds nearly parallel with its sides
for twelve or fifteen inches. If the wood of the seat, door, table,
etc., be sufficiently thick, she sometimes forms three or four of these
long holes in its interior, a labour which for a single insect seems
prodigious, and in the execution of it some weeks are sometimes
employed. On the ground, for about a foot from the place in which one of
these bees is working, little heaps of timber-dust are to be seen. These
heaps daily increase in size, and the particles that compose them are
almost as large as those produced by a hand-saw.”[88] When the tunnels
are finished, the mother bee divides them into some dozen little rooms
about an inch deep, making the divisions of wood-dust, which she cements
together by aid of a glutinous secretion with which she is furnished.
Before each cell is closed it is filled with a paste composed of the
farina of flowers, mixed with honey (it makes one envy the grub), and an
egg is deposited in it. As each cell takes some time to make and
provision, it is obvious that the egg in the lower one will hatch a
little sooner than the one above it, and so on right up to the top. If,
therefore, any one of the larvæ “were to force its way upwards, which it
could easily do, it would not only disturb, but would infallibly destroy
all those lodged in the superior cells.”[88] Here, however, natural
selection (called Providence in Bingley’s time) steps in, and “has
wisely prevented this devastation, for the head of the nymph
(chrysalis), and consequently of the emerging bee, is always placed in a
downward direction.”[88] Of course, therefore, the insect moves forward
in the direction towards which it looks at birth—its new birth, that is
to say; and, moreover—this is the really astonishing thing—“the mother
digs a hole at the bottom of the long tube, which makes a communication
between the undermost cell and the open air. By this contrivance, as all
the bees instinctively endeavour to cut their way downward, they find an
easy and convenient passage, for they have only to pierce the floor of
their cells in order to make their escape, and this they do with their
teeth very readily.” As regards this communicating passage, however, it
is presumably a mere continuation of the tunnel, and was probably once
occupied with cells, like the upper portion. Why the lower end of the
tunnel should have come in time to be left empty—what advantage, that is
to say, its being so represents—it is not easy to see, but possibly it
stood in danger of being reached by a bird’s beak, through what has now
become the exit of escape merely.

As there is a leaf-cutting ant, so, too, there is a leaf-cutting bee,
but here the resemblance ends, since no thought of food or fungus enters
the mind of the latter insect. Her more simple and direct object is to
make the severed leaves into cells, and this she does with wonderful
skill and ingenuity. The cells, which are made by rolling the pieces of
leaves round within a tunnel or gallery, previously excavated in the
earth, are separated from one another by a circular piece, which fits
into the tube with extreme nicety, making at once the ceiling of each
lower compartment and the floor of that above it. As each is finished
the bee, as in the other instances, fills it with a mixture of honey and
pollen, upon which she then lays an egg, and finally closes the mouth of
the tunnel. The leaf principally used for the manufacture of these
pretty cradles is the rose leaf, and the paste which fills them is of a
rose-red colour, owing to the pollen having been collected for the most
part from thistles.

The children of the leaf-cutting bee, therefore, are delicately housed,
but what are they, in this respect, to those of the poppy or tapestry
bee, who are born like the Byzantine princes in a “purple[89] chamber”
made of the rich leaves of poppies? Here they lie, or crawl, in state,
one to each royal apartment, which is filled, almost to the brim, with
the sweet food of bees. Yet when they come forth, at last, it is not as
gorgeous imperial creatures clothed in “purple and pall,” but only
little ordinary-looking black bees covered all over with dirty grey
hair. And their beautiful purple poppy chamber has been seen by no
one—not even by themselves probably—buried as it is full three inches
deep in the earth. Wallace, somewhere in his _Malay Archipelago_,
moralises over the beautiful little kingbird of paradise, sparkling out
its life amidst the forest solitudes of a remote island, unseen by human
eyes, save those of savages, till once or twice, perhaps, in a century,
some wandering white man, who alone is capable of appreciating its
beauty, comes to bang its life out and bear away its skin. The thought
of this dainty little crimson-tapestried bower lying in black darkness,
like a grave beneath one’s feet, rouses a similar train of reflection in
the mind, but perhaps it would do so more strongly were it associated in
the same degree with ideas of sport or profitable collecting.

The carding-bee is interesting, not so much for the nest which it makes,
as for the wonderful way in which it makes it—or, to express it more
justly, it is more especially interesting on this account. Having either
made or found a suitable cavity, these bees under-roof it with a thick
thatching of moss. To carry this, bit by bit, to the place, would take
them a very long time, so, instead of doing so, they stand one behind
another, with their backs toward the nest, in a line that reaches from
the moss to its entrance. The furthest bee then pulls out a piece with
her mandibles, cards it with her fore feet, and, with the others, passes
it on, beneath her body, to the second bee, who passes it to the third,
the third to the fourth, and so on, all down the line, the last bee
entering the nest with it. Thus these bees do with moss exactly what
rats have been seen to do with eggs, when transporting them to their
burrows. A most interesting anecdote of this is quoted by Romanes,[90]
from Jesse’s _Gleanings_, but it does not appear to be in my edition,
which I had thought was a complete one. All I can find is a bare
reference to their having been known to “convey” eggs from a box, in
this way—“convey the wise it call.” This is an annoying discovery, for I
detest all selections, not made by myself, from Palgrave’s _Golden
Treasury_ to any man’s “Hundred Rest Books.” But if my edition _is_ a
complete one, then the thing should be looked into, for the anecdote
quoted by Romanes is not there—at least it is untraceable through the
index.

Like ants, bees are subject to parasites, and as some belonging to the
former are ants themselves, so with bees we have the same thing, but
developed to a still more striking extent; for there is no ant that I
know of that lives with another which it so closely resembles that the
latter is unable to distinguish it from itself. Such bees, however,
there are. Some of our humble bees, for instance, go through life thus
attended by a double whose existence it never for one moment suspects.
The two, indeed, are linked in the closest bonds of social intimacy.
Together they leave the nest, together they fly from flower to flower,
together they re-enter it. Together, too, they seem to glow in
industry—to emulate each other’s toil. But all the while that the true
industrious bee is collecting pollen and nectar the double is only
pretending to do so—or rather, let us say, seeming—and whilst the former
bustles about, feeding the larvæ and making the cells, the latter only
bustles about, like the shadow of a busy person on the wall. But when
the true bee lays an egg, the double lays one too, almost at the same
moment, and in the very same cell. Both are then hatched, together, and
the two larvæ grow up in the same cradle, nourished by the same food,
make their transformation side by side, and so creep forth into the
nest. The two, as I say, are hardly to be distinguished one from
another, yet all the while one is a real true-hearted humble bee, and
the other a mere show, a stage make-up, an outer shell without any of
the proper qualities inside. And the best of the joke is, that,
probably, the false or cuckoo bee, as it is called, is as much deceived
as its foster relatives, and imagines itself a good honest sterling
member of the community. It is forced by nature to cheat, but the fraud
is unconscious, and the impostor is imposed on in its turn.

Thus in the insect world we have something which can only be brought
about, amongst ourselves, through a conscious disguise, by means of
wigs, false moustaches, etc.—what we call an impersonation—but here is a
life-long impersonation which costs the “born actor” no trouble. Why is
this? What is the meaning of it? Why should one bee—or any other insect
or creature—look just like another one, and yet have a Latin name of its
own, which the other has no right to? Why should the individuals of one
species be hardly more like each other than they are like the
individuals of another species, even though—as is often the case—these
two species are widely separated in the system of nature? Such are the
questions to which a consideration of these cuckoo-bees, as they are
called, give rise. They will be answered, if at all, in the following
chapter.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIX


    Natural selection—Protective resemblances—A locust’s
      stratagem—Mock leaf-cutting ants—Flowery dissemblers—A Malay
      explanation—Snake-suggesting caterpillars—A prudent
      lizard—Inconclusive experiments—A bogus ant—Flies that live
      with bees—A caterpillar that dresses up—A portrait-modelling
      caterpillar.

EVERYBODY knows nowadays how all the different species of animals and
plants, living and extinct, have come into existence. It was quite
simple. All they had to do was to keep on varying. Some of them varied
in a way that was good for them, some in a way that was bad. The latter
died, but the others increased and multiplied, and as the process was
always going on, and it is impossible to vary long without becoming
changed, it happened that creatures which had started with a certain
appearance got in time to have quite another one, so that they would not
have been recognised by the people who used to know them, if these same
people had kept alive. However, as the process was so slow that it took
millions of years, and is still going on, awkward things of this sort
never happened, and so, as nobody had ever seen one species of animal
change into another before their eyes, they found it difficult to
believe that they ever had done so; for the ordinary person says
“seeing’s believing,” though he believes in all sorts of things that
neither he nor anyone else ever has seen, or is ever likely to. Still,
for all that, he thinks his own eyesight must be better than anyone
else’s.

This process of eternal change, with the changes for the better
surviving, and those for the worse dying out, is what is called natural
selection, and if we understand it—as there are few now who do not—we
can understand this, that if any kind of creature is so strong and
formidable that it would be an advantage for weaker creatures to be
mistaken for it, then it is not at all unlikely that some of these
weaker creatures will get more and more to resemble it, until at last
they are so mistaken. For instance, our common wasps, who are armed with
a formidable sting, and are very skilful in using it, are not attacked
by any other insect, excepting hornets, which are not common. Any fly or
moth, therefore, that resembles a wasp will be generally left alone, and
the more so the more it resembles it. Accordingly we do find flies and
moths that look very like wasps, and live safely in consequence. Still
more would it be of advantage to look like a hornet, and there is a moth
so like one that it is called the Hornet-clear-wing.

On this same principle of being mistaken for something that is safe from
attack or annoyance, all sorts of animals, and in a special degree
insects, have come to look like various objects around them, and amidst
which they live, such as stems of grass, pieces of moss or stick,
leaves, flowers, and so on—some of the resemblances being more special
and extraordinary. These are things which, though the eye may see, it
does not as a rule dwell upon, because there are so many others round
about. Who, for instance, would look at any particular blade of grass?
So a bird that would pounce down upon an insect that it saw moving
amongst the leaves of a tree, if there was no doubt that it was an
insect, would not take any pains to examine what only looked like one
leaf amongst many.

Thus, throughout nature we have these curious resemblances of certain
creatures to certain other creatures, or to the plants or inanimate
objects around them, but it is principally amongst insects that the
phenomenon is met with, probably because they increase and multiply so
quickly that there has been more time both for the laws of inheritance
and for the great controlling one of natural selection to have come into
play. Whatever is the reason, there is no doubt about the fact, which
will be best illustrated by one or two salient instances.

Ants, though they fall a prey to various animals larger than
themselves—such as birds or ant-eaters—yet in their relations with other
insects occupy a position of comparative safety, on account of their
weapons and pugnacity, and, still more, of their numbers. The driver
ants of equatorial Africa, and their South American representatives, the
_ecitons_, are indeed, when they set out on their foraging expeditions,
the terror, not only of insects, but of all animal life. “Wherever they
move,” says Bates, referring to the latter, “the whole animal world is
set in commotion, and every creature tries to get out of their way.”[91]
This, however, as they climb trees, and send out encircling columns
which enclose a considerable extent of ground, is difficult, or rather,
impossible, for all such as cannot fly some distance without alighting;
for if an ant or two once seize upon them all is over. An insect,
therefore, that cannot evade the onset of such an enemy is lucky if it
has some such means of ensuring its safety as has been above referred
to. One at least thus specially favoured inhabits Nicaragua. “I was much
surprised,” says Mr. Belt, “with the behaviour of a green leaf-like
locust. This insect stood immovably amongst a host of ants, many of
which ran over its legs, without ever discovering there was food within
their reach. So fixed was its instinctive knowledge that its safety
depended on its immovability, that it allowed me to pick it up and
replace it amongst the ants without making a single effort to escape. It
might easily have escaped from the ants by using its wings, but it would
only have fallen into as great a danger, for the numerous birds that
accompany the army of ants are ever on the outlook for any insect that
may fly up, and the heavy flying locusts, grasshoppers, and cockroaches
have no chance of escape.”[92] This locust resembled a green leaf which,
as we have seen, was a very protective resemblance indeed. It might,
however, had it been a smaller insect, have resembled one of the ants
themselves, and in that case could have run about with them, pretending
or appearing to forage, also with perfect impunity. Whether the _Eciton_
has such a double I know not, but various ants have. With some it is a
spider that assumes their form. With others, as we have seen to a
partial extent, a caterpillar, but the _Sauba_, or leaf-cutting
ant—which is also the mushroom-growing one—is understudied, leaf and
all, by an insect which, though the order to which it belongs has been
determined, has not yet apparently received a name. “An example,” says
Professor Poulton, “of protective mimicry, which I believe to be more
wonderful in its detail and complexity than any which has been hitherto
described, was observed and interpreted by my friend Mr. W. L. Sclater,
in 1886, during his investigations in British Guiana. Mr. Sclater and
his native servant had been collecting insects by shaking the branches
of a tree over a sheet. The servant, although described as a very acute
observer, saw an insect on the sheet which he mistook for one of the
abundant Cooshie ants (perhaps the native name), carrying its little
jagged segment of leaf over its back. Mr. Sclater looked more closely,
and saw that it was an entirely different insect belonging to the order
_Homoptera_. Its length was about that of an ant carrying its leaf. The
leaf was represented by the thin flattened body of the insect which in
its dorsal part is so compressed laterally that it is no thicker than a
leaf” (or as we would say, which along the back is no thicker than a
leaf), “and terminates in a sharp, jagged edge. The head and legs were
brown, and suggested the appearance of that part of an ant which is
uncovered by the piece of leaf. The jagged dorsal line, when seen in
profile, evidently corresponds to the roughly gnawed edge of the
fragment of leaf, for Mr. Sclater tells me that the contour of the
latter is generally shaped by the mandibles of the ant rather than due
to the natural margin.”[93]

The above-mentioned insect is a dweller in trees, and one might have
supposed that a general resemblance to the leaves among which it moves
would have been a sufficient protection for it. This probably was the
beginning of the deception, which became more complex as time went on.
In the leaf-like back of the insect we see probably the original
disguise, but as the eyes of birds became more acute they began to
pierce through it, more especially when the creature walked. Round about
the would-be leaf, however, the leaf-cutting ants—distasteful to the
birds that so affected it—were constantly moving and walking. If only it
could get to resemble one of these it might be as active as it pleased,
and especially if its motions, as well as its appearance, became ant- or
ant and leaf-like. And this, indeed, was what gradually began to take
place. Variation was always going on, and natural selection was always
at hand to mould and shape its results. The two insects were, to begin
with, of much the same size, and the general leaf-like appearance of the
one was a good basis on which the more particular resemblance to the cut
piece of leaf, carried by the other, might be founded. A few deeper
washes of brown, some not very profound modifications of contour, and an
ant-suggesting legs and body began to appear beneath it. Meanwhile,
however, hundreds of thousands—nay, millions—of bad or mediocre copies
were swept away, the species became rarer and rarer—trembled, perhaps,
on the verge of extinction; but just when it might have appeared to the
birds, who were no longer able to obtain a once much-enjoyed morsel,
that it really was extinct, it was saved; nature’s object had been
gained. A certain number of individuals were left, were close at hand
even; even now, at that very moment, one might be crawling on the same
twig where a despondent bird sat, only it was not to be distinguished
from a leaf-cutting ant. Such are the ways of nature, such the slaughter
that attends her victories.

In Borneo, and the Malay Archipelago generally, there is a pretty pink
flower known as the “Straits Rhododendron.” Once a gentleman was looking
at one of these flowers and admiring it, when all at once it turned
round and stared him in the face. It was not a flower, but a mantis; its
flattened legs—pink like them—made the petals; its abdomen, turned up
over the back and held thus motionless, resembled an opening bud. “When
I held the branch on which the insect had established itself in my hand
I could not tell exactly where animal tissue commenced and where flower
ended, so perfectly was the one assimilated to the other, both in colour
and surface-texture.”[94] When once established on a flower this mantis
would remain there quite motionless, if undisturbed, until it had
occasion to leave it; and of course, in nature, had any insect settled
on or near it, it would have instantly been seized. The ways of the
mantis are well known. “Under a most sanctimonious aspect,” says Fabre,
speaking of the little green one of Provence, “it hides the morals of a
cannibal”;[95] and, indeed, the female, which is larger and stronger
than the male, will often turn upon the latter and devour it in the very
midst of a love-passage. This it does, as in all other cases, by
suddenly launching forward one or both of its fore-arms—which have been
previously held in an attitude of prayer—and enclosing the body of the
victim between their first and second segments, each of which is toothed
along the edge like a saw. The double row of teeth meet in the body,
which, held aloft, and writhing on either side of the trap, is devoured
piecemeal by the mantis, who, with its sharp jaws, tears little
mouthfuls out of it as long as it, or its appetite, lasts. This process,
made more interesting by the way in which it was brought about, was
witnessed in the case of the above-mentioned species. Small flies
frequently settled upon it as it sat motionless, flower-like amidst
flowers. “These it made no attempt either to drive off or to capture;
its motions seeming rather to attract than repel them. After a short
time a larger _Dipteron_, as big as a common house-fly, alighted on the
inflorescence within reach of the predatory limbs. Then the mantis
became active immediately; the fly was seized, torn in pieces, and
devoured.”[96] Such are the real propensities of the seeming flower, and
such, too, it may be observed, are those of some actual flowers—to wit,
insectivorous ones.

To the Malays, however, whose minds are not yet open to the doctrines of
protective or aggressive resemblance, or to evolution generally, this
mantis _is_ a flower, they “know not seems.” The blossoms of “the
_sendudok_” have become alive, and perhaps some analogies suggested by
their own life-experience temper their surprise at such an apparent
change of disposition. They say, too, that few men ever see more than
one flower-mantis in the whole course of their lives, so rare a creature
is it. In this, no doubt, they are right; yet it would be possible,
perhaps, even for a Malay to see several without knowing anything about
it. Native eyes are almost always sharper and better than those of the
Europeans who come amongst them; but, on the other hand, no native goes
about like a modern entomologist, with his eyes specially open in one
direction and the possibilities of protective resemblance in his mind.

The same naturalist, during the same expedition, was singularly
delighted to secure a larva, whose resemblance to a snake was “so
startlingly accurate that I was, for a moment, completely deceived.”[96]
A description follows which, as it is of that kind which deals longly
and learnedly in details without producing any particular general
effect, may be left out. It would seem, however, that this caterpillar,
like many others, has the power of withdrawing its actual head into a
fold or two of its skin, which is here so marked that it performs the
office of a mask, obscuring and taking the place of the real head thus
obliterated. The mask is furnished with two spots, which at once become
the creature’s eyes, and both in colour, shape, and general appearance
bear a remarkable resemblance to those of a snake; whilst a wrinkled
fold, running back on either side from what appears to be the snout,
suggests the mouth, and the flattened head with its characteristic
arrangement of broad, flattened scales is also indicated by certain
markings and colours on the required part of the caterpillar’s body. An
apparent head like this, thrown suddenly up as though threatening to
dart forward with a hiss and distended jaws, might alarm anyone, and
such a mock demonstration is evidently required to give full effect to
the disguise. Thus we are told that “when the larva was moving about
with the anterior segments well expanded the resemblance to a snake was
not so startling; but directly it was touched the terrifying attitude
was assumed, the anterior segments being drawn in and the front of the
body turned towards the aggressor. When, at the same time, the hinder
part of the body was hidden by leaves the deception became complete, and
if effective enough to deceive, even temporarily, a human being, it must
surely be equally effective in deterring less highly organised and timid
foes.”

For the “timid” certainly, but for the “less highly organised” the
conclusion does not seem so plain. No sight is better than a bird’s,
and it is practice that makes perfect in any particular direction.
Still, unless we suppose the disguise to be accidental merely—and this
no one with a knowledge of the whole subject can do—the object of it
seems clearly apparent, and we may, therefore, assume that, on the
whole, it is successful—to the extent, at any rate, of keeping the
species in existence. In such matters, however, there is nothing like
practical experiments, if one has the chance of making them, as the
finder of the caterpillar in question must have had, since he says,
“Unfortunately I was unable to test the efficacy of the disguise, for
fear of losing the larva, which I was anxious to rear for the purpose
of identification.”[96] To me this appears a false judgment. Such a
test would have been much more interesting, surely, especially if
resulting in the way anticipated, than a dry pinned specimen and a
Latin name.

Another large snake-resembling caterpillar was found by Bates in the
forests of Brazil, and the likeness was sufficiently striking to alarm
several people to whom he showed it. But it is not necessary to go so
far afield, for here in England, according to Professor Poulton, we have
an excellent example of this kind of protective resemblance. This is no
other than the caterpillar of the elephant hawk-moth, which by
withdrawing its head into its body—just as does the Bornean
species—produces a similar false face, with a pair, or, indeed, two
pairs of fierce-looking eyes.[97] This caterpillar feeds on the great
willow herb, and when at rest keeps amongst the dead brown leaves at the
base of the stem. “As soon,” says Professor Poulton, “as the leaves are
rustled by an approaching enemy, the caterpillar swiftly draws its head
and the three first body-rings into the two next rings, bearing the
eye-like marks. These two rings are thus swollen, and look like the head
of the animal, upon which four enormous, terrible-looking eyes are
prominent. The effect is greatly heightened by the suddenness of the
transformation, which endows an innocent-looking and inconspicuous
animal with a terrifying and serpent-like appearance.”[98]

With this caterpillar, since naturalists know what to call it, and there
is no chance of its handing down any of their names in Latin to
posterity, it has been possible to make experiments, and on the whole
perhaps they have been in favour of the protective resemblance theory.
The most interesting one—that I have read, that is to say—was made by
Professor Poulton with a full-sized green lizard, and is thus described
by him: “The lizard was evidently suspicious, and yet afraid to attack
the caterpillar, which maintained the terrifying attitude in the most
complete manner throughout. The lizard kept boldly advancing, and then
retreating in fright; but at each advance it approached rather nearer to
the caterpillar. After this had taken place many times and nothing had
happened, the lizard grew bolder and ventured to gently bite what
appeared to be the head of the caterpillar; it then swiftly retired, but
finding that there was no retaliation it again advanced and gave it a
rather harder bite. After a few bites had been given in this cautious
manner, the lizard appeared satisfied that the whole thing was a fraud,
and devoured the caterpillar in the ordinary manner.”[98] Professor
Poulton has no doubt as to the lizard having been alarmed at first by
the appearance of the caterpillar, and adds that he has never seen one
act in the same way on any other occasion; other large hawk-moth
caterpillars being eaten at once with entire _sang-froid_. It may be
observed, however, that if every lizard were to act in the way recorded,
under natural conditions, the advantage to the caterpillar would be nil,
since though a species may survive through not being eaten, it certainly
will not through being eaten with hesitation. And why should a lizard be
more timid in the open air than in a box or a fern-case? Unless we
assume, therefore, that this particular one was bolder than most others
would be, the result of the experiment was not for, but against, the
theory it was designed to test; and since we have no business to assume,
the only thing to do is to get more caterpillars, and give them to more
lizards. Small birds, however—and this in a country like England is more
to the point—seem really to fear these pseudo-snakes to the extent of
flying away from them.[99] But would an ordinary large caterpillar of
the _Sphingidæ_—say, of a privet hawk or death’s-head moth—frighten them
in the same way? If so, then again we are nowhere.

Perhaps a still more extraordinary instance of protective resemblance
than any of the foregoing is that of a caterpillar which pretends to be
an ant—one provided with an efficient sting, and of an irritable
disposition. Here, as in the snake cases, it is by one portion of the
body only that the fraud is perpetrated, but this, instead of being the
front, is the hind part, in which, perhaps, it offers a unique example
of the sort. The colour of the caterpillar is exactly that of the ant,
and whilst its extremity represents the latter’s head, two black spots
which are there situated bear an equally close resemblance to the eyes.
The jaws are represented by the last pair of false legs or claspers,
which are of disproportionate size, and can upon occasion be stretched
widely apart, whilst a number of thin, tentacle-like processes, attached
in pairs to the segments of the body, have all the appearance of an
ant’s legs and antennæ. Armed with these properties, which, however, in
a state of quiescence are not very recognisable, the caterpillar waits,
as one may say, to have its feelings ruffled, when, by flinging the
hinder part of its body into the air, each separate appurtenance begins
at once to act the part assigned it, and the whole becomes a startling
make-up. The head, with eyes, is jerked from side to side, the jaws
gape, the legs move, the antennæ quiver, and an angry, threatening ant
starts, as by magic, into being. “When,” says Mr. Annandale, “the
caterpillar is seen in an end-on position, or when the anterior
two-thirds of the body are hidden, the resemblance is positively
startling,” so that “it is difficult to imagine how a lizard or a frog
with a previous experience of the ant could fail to be deterred.”[100]

In the light of the above cases, that of the cuckoo-bees does not seem
so very wonderful, since both the species are bees, and all or most of
the members of any group or family of animals as a rule bear some
resemblance to one another, since they descend from a common and not
very remote ancestor. Many flies, however, have almost as close a
resemblance to various bees and wasps, whilst one of the latter is even
the model for a species of cricket, which would otherwise fall a victim
to it and others of its family. There is a beetle, too, so like a wasp,
not only in its appearance, but in the way in which it runs about and
moves its antennæ, that anyone almost would be taken in. Whether, under
this disguise, it enters wasps’ nests and preys upon the larvæ, as the
bee-like _Volucella_ flies enter the nests of the humble-bees they
imitate, I do not know, nor, I think, does anyone, but this might very
well be the case. These flies, however, now I come to think of it, do
not really injure the bees. It used to be the idea that they did, but
lately it has been discovered that they are only scavengers, feeding on
all the waste products of their hosts, and even on their dead bodies
should such opportunities arise.[101] The humble-bees, on their part,
seem to appreciate these services, though we are not entitled to say
that they admit the flies into their nests on this account, since they
probably do so owing to their likeness to themselves.

Of the walking-stick insects, which are hardly to be distinguished, even
with close attention, from the grass or twigs on which they cling,
everyone has heard or read, and the caterpillars, common enough in
England, which remain motionless, projecting like a twig from its stem,
and looking just the same as one, are almost as good instances of
unconscious deception. But neither these caterpillars, nor any of the
other insects that have been mentioned, do anything, except through the
attitudes they assume, to produce their wonderful disguises. They have
nothing to do with the cutting out of the material. They do not dress up
for the part themselves. That, however, is what some caterpillars do.
There is one, for instance, in Borneo, that has a number of spines
arranged in pairs down its back, and on each of these spines it fixes
several little buds of the plant on which it is feeding, such buds, and
not the leaves of the plant, being the actual food it eats. Consequently
the caterpillar, which is quite a small one, looks like a spray of tiny
buds itself, and can hardly, by possibility, be noticed amidst its
flowery chaplet. The buds are not impaled on the spines, as might be
supposed, but are attached to them with silk, which the caterpillar
weaves for the purpose, and the whole process of the thing has been
observed by the gentleman who gives the account, and who is no less
competent a person than the curator of the Sarawak Museum. This is what
he says: “A bud would be shorn off with the mandibles, then held in the
two front pairs of legs, and covered all over with silk issuing from the
mouth of the caterpillar. The caterpillar then twisted the front part of
its body round, and attached with silk the bud to one of the spinous
processes, and another bud would then be attached to this, and so on
until a sufficiently long string—generally three or four buds—was made,
when operations on another spine would be commenced. The caterpillar fed
on these buds, scooping out the interior, and when not hurried, using
the empty shells in preference to whole buds for its covering. When
irritated it curled up, and remained thus for fifteen or twenty minutes.
At other times it would sway about, looking like a branchlet blown by
the breeze.”[102]

In time this caterpillar made “a silk cocoon covered with buds,” but it
never turned into a butterfly, for ants attacked it, and its life was
nipped in the bud. It appears to be a very rare caterpillar, and nobody
knows what butterfly it belongs to, or what is its full Latin name.
Since it is a _Geometer_, however, why not _Geometer ignota_ under a
sketch (as given in _Nature_, June 25th, 1903), in the cabinet—which
would, in all cases, be the better plan?

I really do not know whether this or another caterpillar of South
America be the more extraordinary, for if the one makes itself like
something, the other makes something like itself. _Anæa_ (_sp?_)—I give
the name as I find it—is a little green caterpillar having a very funny
nondescript sort of shape—as much like a little piece of gnawed-out
leaf, left hanging to the midrib, as anything else. Such an object,
however, is not one of the common ones of nature, and if it stood alone
might be unrecognised or misinterpreted. The caterpillar, therefore,
feeding along the midrib of the leaf, gnaws out a number of such little
pieces, more or less like itself, and leaves them sticking upright along
it, attached by a point or two. All the rest of the leaf at that part of
the midrib, it apparently eats, or bites away, so that there remains
only the slender, bare stalk, with several bits of leaf upon it, one of
which is the caterpillar. To say which bit is he is now very difficult,
and it looks as if none of them were. This caterpillar is, of course,
green, like the leaf he feeds on, but he is not the same colour all
over. He is light above and dark below, and this exactly suits—I have it
on authority—the chiaroscuro of the situation, so that, both in light
and shadow, he looks for all the world like a little elongated bit of
green leaf attached to the midrib by a couple of stalks.[103] One would
say, “Some caterpillars must have been eating that leaf”; but one would
never think the caterpillar that had been eating it was still there.



------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               CHAPTER XX


    Butterfly resemblances—A living leaf—How spiders trap
      butterflies—Butterfly doubles—Suggested explanation—More
      evidence wanted—Warning coloration—A theory on trust—A
      straightforward test—Advice to naturalists—A strange
      omission.

SOME of the most remarkable instances of protective resemblances amongst
insects are exhibited by butterflies, one, perhaps, being the most
perfect existing under nature; however, I only say perhaps. This is the
world-renowned leaf butterfly of Sumatra, and elsewhere in the Malay
Archipelago. Of the great purple emperor family, it is purple on the
upper surface, and gleams like a meteor as it shoots about in the rich,
sun-bathed atmosphere of the tropics, its conspicuousness being enhanced
by a sort of miniature, sharp-pointed swallow-tail, in which the hinder
pair of wings end, and a broad, orange bar, like a sash or scarf of
honour, running right across the anterior wings. It flies boldly and
strongly, and when it descends upon a bush or shrub it is as though a
little purple torch had shot through the foliage; but all at once, even
though you see it come down just in front of you, it has vanished
utterly—the torch has gone out. You may look and look, but unless you
know the trick, and have seen the settling, and never taken your eyes
off the exact spot, you will never find the butterfly, or see anything
more of it until, all at once, it gleams in the air again. For the under
part of the leaf butterfly’s lovely purple wings is like the leaf
indeed—“the sere, the yellow leaf”—with a midrib running down the centre
veinings on either side, a curled tip at the top, a stalk at the bottom,
and everything proper to leaves, but not as a rule to butterflies. All
four wings join in this effect, for being thrown up in the usual way
when the insect settles, the leaf-like shape is thus brought about,
one-half of the under surface being seen on each side in clear profile,
whilst the purple now lies hid within, like the pictures on a folded
screen. As for the body of the butterfly, that is hidden inside the
wings too; the legs are all but invisible, and the two little pointed
swallow-tails, just touching the plant’s stem with their mutual tip,
make the stalk of the leaf. Even on the wall of a room or a curtain it
would seem as though a dead leaf were sticking there; how much more
when, as is always the case, the butterfly flies into some bush or
thicket crowded with dry, brown leaves, and settles all amongst them. It
is not that you don’t see it there that makes you miss it, but that you
see it and scores of brown leaves all about it, every one of which looks
just the same as itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


    The picture at the top shows birds pursuing butterflies, while
      in the one below the same birds have lost their prey, as the
      butterflies have alighted and show only the underside of
      their wings, which are practically indistinguishable from
      the neighbouring leaves.

To make the matter plainer, in case this is not a very accurate
description, here is the account of an eye-witness: “This species,” says
Dr. Wallace, “was not uncommon in dry woods and thickets, and I often
endeavoured to capture it without success, for after flying a short
distance it would enter a bush among dry or dead leaves, and however
carefully I crept up to the spot, I could never discover it till it
would suddenly dart out again, and then disappear in a similar place. At
length I was fortunate enough to see the exact spot where the butterfly
settled, and though I lost sight of it for some time, I at length
discovered that it was close before my eyes, but that in its position of
repose it so closely resembled a dead leaf attached to a twig as almost
certainly to deceive the eye, even when gazing full upon it.” Then
follows a minute explanation of the imposture. “The end of the upper
wings terminates in a fine point, just as the leaves of many tropical
shrubs and trees are pointed, while the lower wings are somewhat more
obtuse, and are lengthened out into a short, thick tail. Between these
two points there runs a dark, curved line exactly representing the
midrib of a leaf, and from this radiate on each side a few oblique
marks, which well imitate the lateral veins. The tint of the under
surface varies much, but it is always some ashy brown or reddish colour,
which matches with those of dead leaves. The habit of the species is
always to rest on a twig and among dead or dry leaves, and in this
position, with the wings closely pressed together, their outline is
exactly that of a moderately-sized leaf, slightly curved or shrivelled.
The tail of the hind wings forms a perfect stalk, and touches the stick,
while the insect is supported by the middle pair of legs, which are not
noticed among the twigs and fibres that surround it. The head and
antennæ are drawn back between the wings, so as to be quite concealed,
and there is a little notch hollowed out at the very base of the wings,
which allows the head to be retracted sufficiently. All these varied
details combine to produce a disguise that is so complete and marvellous
as to astonish everyone who observes it, and the habits of the insect
are such as to utilise all these peculiarities, and render them
available in such a manner as to remove all doubt of the purpose of this
singular case of mimicry, which is undoubtedly a protection to the
insect. Its strong and swift flight is sufficient to save it from its
enemies when on the wing, but if it were equally conspicuous when at
rest it could not long escape extinction, owing to the attacks of the
insectivorous birds and reptiles that abound in the tropical
forests.”[104]

Dr. Wallace then speaks of another closely allied species which is
common in India, on the under surface of whose wings there are
sometimes, to the boot of all that has been described, in the way of
disguise, “patches and spots formed of small black dots, so closely
resembling the way in which minute fungi grow on leaves that it is
almost impossible, at first, not to believe that fungi have grown on the
butterflies themselves.”[104] The minuteness of a resemblance like this
is really very surprising, for it seems as though the butterfly-hunting
bird or insect—some powerful wasp may represent the latter—was capable
of minutely examining the object in question, and saying to itself, as
it were, “I don’t think that can be a leaf, because there are no black
spots upon it,” or _vice versâ_. In reality, however, it is no doubt the
general effect, to which every detail contributes, that tells. What such
resemblances do seem to me to show—and this, I think, is a new idea—is
the accuracy and precision of some insects’ sight. How insects see
things has long been a question, and many, I suppose, think it quite
uncertain whether a leaf, for instance, throws the same picture on their
retina that it does on ours. But if, to deceive them, the copy must be
such that it also deceives us, is it not clear that it does? Otherwise
the effect of the original could probably be reproduced by a less
accurate copy. How little, after all, does the finest painting really
resemble nature! The effect alone does so, not the means by which it is
arrived at. Surely, then, if an insect, looking at a leaf or any other
object, received but a general impression of colour, with an outline
more or less blurred, or ill-defined, these copies of nature by
nature—made to deceive—would bear witness to the fact. A study of
protective resemblances is perhaps the best way of forming an idea as to
how creatures, other than ourselves, see the world. It is even possible
that such resemblances exist, which we, because we see things
differently, are totally incapable of detecting.

I do not know if any other striking case of resemblance to an inanimate
object (if plant life can be included under this term) is offered by the
butterfly world, though there are several more of the same kind, but I
cannot remember one just now. No doubt there are many which have not yet
been discovered. We have, however, various instances of concealment even
here in England, as, for instance, the peacock butterfly; but these, as
well as special resemblances, are, for the most part, more marked in
moths. The lappet moth, indeed, though it does not quite get the shape,
looks very like a dead brown leaf, whilst in the buff-tip moth we are
supposed to have a special resemblance to a piece of rotting wood,
clothed with moss or lichen, and broken at each end. Personally, I have
never received the impression of such a definite object, but only a
general one of rot and decay. Even here, however, I do not believe I
could ever be taken in, for the yellow head and tips of the wings, which
are supposed to offer a perfect resemblance to the two broken ends of
the piece of wood, are to me the tell-tale parts, and instantly cry out,
“Moth!” In fact, soft as is the colouring of the buff-tip, it still
seems to me a salient object, and I do not think very much of that
bird’s eyesight who fails to detect it under anything like favourable
circumstances.

Another moth that flies by day, and is not uncommon in the United
States, bears, when sitting on a leaf, a much stronger resemblance to a
bird-dropping, but in this not uncommon form of imitation moths, and all
other insects, are outdone by spiders, who use it aggressively against
them, and particularly, it would seem, against butterflies, as the
following instances will show. Mr. Forbes once, whilst travelling in
Java, saw a butterfly settled upon a bird-dropping. He watched it for
some time, and then, wondering at its long stay, approached cautiously,
and, slowly extending his hand, actually caught it by its wings, between
his finger and thumb—no mean feat, as it seemed, yet there was nothing
to boast of. As he lifted the butterfly only the wings came away, the
rest of it staying with the supposed bird-dropping, which was now seen
to be a spider, who, having caught the butterfly by means of this
shameful imposture, was quietly occupied in eating it. The disguise in
this case was of the most wonderful perfection. “Such excreta,” says Mr.
Forbes, who discovered this one, “consist of a central and denser
portion of a pure white, chalk-like colour, streaked here and there with
black, and surrounded by a thin border of the dried-up, more fluid
part.”[105] The appearance of each of these constituent parts was
successfully counterfeited by the spider in question, who, in its own
person, represented the more solid material, and spun the rest with its
web.

As I know from early experience, when a naturalist makes a prize, all at
once, of some interesting specimen, for some time afterwards he expects,
or, rather, feels as if he would see some other on every leaf or twig;
but time went by and no more of these “vain, delusive” spiders presented
themselves. At length, years afterwards, the same naturalist found
himself by the banks of the Moesi river, in Sumatra (which sounds much
more interesting than the Thames, for instance), and this was his second
experience. “I was,” he says, “rather dreamily looking on the shrubs
before me, when I became conscious of my eyes resting on a
bird-excreta-marked leaf. How strange, I thought, it is that I have
never got another specimen of that curious spider I found in Java, which
simulated a patch just like this! I plucked the leaf by the petiole
while so cogitating and looked at it half-listlessly for some moments,
mentally remarking how closely that other spider had copied nature,
when, to my delighted surprise, I discovered that I had actually secured
a second specimen, but the imitation was so exquisite that I really did
not perceive how matters stood for several moments. The spider never
moved while I was plucking or twirling the leaf, and it was only when I
placed the tip of my little finger on it that I observed that it was a
spider, when it, without any displacement of itself, flashed its falces
into my flesh.”[105] (He means it bit him.)

Not all butterflies are entrapped by the kind of simulacrum here
noticed. Nature can adapt herself to every taste, and in South Africa
there are spiders who make themselves attractive by appearing to be
flowers. Of some of these and their _modus operandi_ Mr. Rowland Trimen,
who was curator of the Cape Town Museum, gives the following interesting
account: “Many species of spiders,” he says, “are well adapted to
succeed by being coloured in resemblance to the flowers in or on which
they await the arrival of their victims. One that inhabits Cape Town is
of the exact rose-red of the flowers of the oleander, and, to more
effectually conceal it, the palpi, top of the cephalothorax, and four
lateral stripes on the abdomen, are white, according remarkably with the
irregular white markings so frequent on the petals of _Nerium_.”[106]
These, indeed, must be beautiful spiders, and one would like to hear a
little more of them, but Mr. Trimen goes at once from red to yellow. “I
was led,” he continues, “to notice a yellow spider of the same group in
consequence of seeing that two of a number of butterflies on the flowers
of _Senecio pulugera_ did not, on my approach, fly off with their
companions. Each of these unfortunates turned out to be in the clutches
of a spider, and when I released them I observed their captors very
narrowly, and I found that the latter’s close resemblance to the
_Senecio_ flowers was not one of colour alone, but due also to attitude.
This spider, holding on to the flower stalk by the two hinder pairs of
legs, extended the two long front pairs upward and laterally. In this
position it was scarcely possible to believe that it was not a flower
seen in profile, the rounded abdomen representing the central mass of
florets and the extended legs the ray florets, while to complete the
illusion the femora of the front pair of legs, adpressed to the thorax,
have each a longitudinal red stripe, which represents the ferruginous
stripe on the sepals of the flower.”[106]

Later on, Mr. Trimen was so fortunate as actually to see a butterfly
caught by another flowery impostor:—“The butterfly,” he tells us, “was
engaged in honey-sucking on a white flower-head of _Lantana_, and
explored each individual flower with its proboscis. While I was watching
it, the butterfly touched and partly walked over what looked like a
slightly folded or crumpled flower about the middle of the cluster. This
turned out to be a spider, which instantly seized the butterfly,
throwing forward its front legs, somewhat after the fashion of a mantis.
In this spider the effect of the little depressions on the limb of the
corolla was given by some depressed lines on the back of its smooth
white abdomen.”[106]

Other spiders resemble snail-shells, others ants, and one, at least, is
like a small scorpion, but we will return to the butterflies. As I have
said, except for that wonderful copy of a leaf, already described, I
cannot think of any very extraordinary resemblances amongst them,
belonging to that class, but there are others which form a little class
of their own. In the last chapter we have seen bees imitating bees, and
in this we will make the acquaintance of certain butterflies which, as
it were, pretend to be of a species which they do not really belong to.
Thus in Brazil, by the great River Amazons, a number of large showy
butterflies are found which belong to the family of the _Heliconea_, and
wherever these fly they are accompanied by various other butterflies,
belonging to quite different families, which are nevertheless so
extremely like them that even Mr. Bates, who, for eleven years, ran up
and down the Amazons with a butterfly-net in his hand, could never be
quite sure which kind it was that he was going to catch. Often, when he
thought he had got a _Heliconea_ he was perfectly thunderstruck to find
it was really a _Papilio_, _Pieris_, _Euterpe_, _Leptalis_,
_Protogonius_, _Ithoneis_, _Dioptis_, _Pericopis_, _Hyelosia_, or
something of that sort; or again, when it was one of these he was after,
and at last he thought he had it in the net, he would be petrified, on
looking more closely, to find that what he had really caught was a
_Heliconea_.

But now, as all these butterflies were alike or nearly alike, how could
Mr. Bates tell—or how had anybody been able to tell before him—that they
were really not all the same species—that a _Heliconea_ was not a
_Papilio_, or that a _Papilio_, _Pieris_, _Euterpe_, etc., were not all
of them _Heliconeas_? This, at first sight, seems a difficult question
to answer, but really it is not, because, in all these families of
butterflies, the various species composing them bear a kind of
generalised resemblance to one another: there is a family likeness, in
fact, and this is not only the case in regard to their outward
appearance—the shape and colour of their wings, etc.—but it applies, in
a still greater degree, to their structure and internal economy. Thus,
however strongly a _Pieris_, or one of those others, might resemble a
_Heliconea_, the trained eye of an entomologist could easily see that it
really was a member of another family, and since, in resembling the
_Heliconea_, it departed from the general type of pattern and colouring
exhibited by the family to which it belonged, whilst this one species of
_Heliconea_ it resembled was like the others, it might be inferred that
the latter was the imitated and not the imitating form. Again—and this
is still more decisive evidence in the cases where it applies—the
resemblance is often confined to one sex of the copying species, viz.
the female, so that whilst she is hardly to be distinguished from the
model on which she has founded herself, the male retains the appearance,
together with all the other characteristics, of the race to which both
he and she belong.

But now came a further question, the most puzzling or, at any rate, the
most important one of all, viz. Why should the one butterfly imitate, or
rather resemble the other, in such an extraordinary degree—a degree
seeming to preclude the possibility of mere chance having brought it
about? This question Mr. Bates is supposed to have been the first to
answer, though I cannot help thinking, myself, that he has only extended
an explanation, which, in some cases, was so obvious that no one had
thought of pointing it out, to these other cases where it was not nearly
so easy to see. For what can be plainer, as Mr. Bates himself remarks,
than that a moth, for instance, by closely resembling a hornet, would
escape the attacks of birds that might otherwise have devoured it? I
cannot think but that so patent an explanation had been in the minds of
many long before 1862, and though no one previous to that date may have
applied the principle of natural selection to such cases, it must be
remembered that natural selection had been established by Darwin some
ten or twelve years before.

Bates, however, besides making an ingenious application of the above
principle to a special case, gave a real reason for something which was
not at all obvious, viz. why one butterfly should be a gainer by closely
resembling another; and this no one had hitherto been able to do. His
surmise, which has since in many instances been confirmed, is as
follows. Having first pointed out that the _Heliconea_ butterflies are a
numerous, flourishing race, whilst those species that imitate them are
poor in numbers, he says, “What advantages the _Heliconidæ_ possess to
make them so flourishing a group, and, consequently, the object of so
much mimetic resemblance, it is not easy to discover. There is nothing
apparent in their structure or habits which could render them safe from
persecution by the numerous insectivorous animals which are constantly
on the watch in the same parts of the forest which they inhabit. It is
probable they are unpalatable to insect enemies. Some of them have
glands near the end of the abdomen which they protrude when roughly
handled; it is well known that similar organs in other families secrete
fetid liquids or gases and that these serve as a protection to the
species. They have all a peculiar smell. I never saw the flocks of
slow-flying _Heliconidæ_ in the woods persecuted by birds or
dragon-flies, to which they would have been easy prey; nor when at rest
on leaves did they appear to be molested by lizards, or the predaceous
flies which were very often seen pouncing on butterflies of other
families. If they owe their flourishing existence to this cause it would
be intelligible why species whose scanty number of individuals reveals a
less protected condition, should be disguised in their dress, and thus
share their immunity. Is it not probable, seeing the excessive abundance
of the one species and the fewness of individuals of the other, that the
_Heliconea_ is free from the persecution to which the _Leptalis_ is
subjected?”[107]

No sooner was this suggestion made than naturalists all over the world
began to test it, or rather to say that it ought to be tested. Some
experiments have been made, but they have not been very numerous, and it
can hardly be said that they entirely support Bates’s view. Sometimes
they do and sometimes they do not, so as there is no reason to suppose
that every butterfly is relished by every kind of insect-eating
creature, this is not conclusive, till the same tests are employed in
regard to butterflies that are not imitated in this way; for if the
latter have not been imitated on that account, it need not be on that
account that others have been imitated. Thus Belt says, as the result of
his observations, “The _Heliconidæ_ are distasteful to most animals; I
have seen even spiders drop them out of their webs again; and small
monkeys, which are extremely fond of insects, will not eat them, as I
have proved over and over again.”[108] He also “observed a pair of birds
that were bringing butterflies and dragon-flies to their young, and
although the _Heliconidæ_ swarmed in the neighbourhood, and are of weak
flight so as to be easily caught, the birds never brought one to their
nest.”[109] This seems very good evidence of the truth of Bates’s
theory, but then, as against it, we learn from the same observer that
“another spider that frequented flowers seemed to be fond of these very
same butterflies,” and as to the spiders which were seen to drop them
out of their webs, they may resolve themselves into one, since farther
on Belt says, “A large species of spider also used to drop them out of
its web when I put them into it.”[109] Then we are told that “there is,
however, a yellow and black-banded wasp that catches them to store his
nest with”; and which, having done so, “would quietly bite off its
wings, roll it up into a ball, and fly off with it.”[110] Professor
Poulton calls these cases “interesting exceptions,” and easily accounts
for them. But might not further observation keep adding to the number of
exceptions, until at last, they become so numerous that all one could
say would be this: “There is a great choice of insects in tropical
America, and some creatures may prefer one kind and some another, to
whatever species they belong.” In India, again, where there is another
family of butterflies having doubles, or understudies, only one species
was refused by all the mantids which a French naturalist gave them to.
Others were eaten by all of them.

Has any man tried eating one of these butterflies? That was what
Professor Wheeler did to test another supposed case of the same sort.
Here the insect was a large and very conspicuously coloured day-flying
moth. This moth has not an understudy, as far as is known, but it was
supposed, then, to be an example of what is called “warning coloration,”
that is to say, its bright colours were believed to be flourished in the
face of any and every animal it might meet with, in order to warn them
that it was not good to eat. Otherwise some bird, or lizard, or other
creature might kill it before it had time to find out that it wasn’t.
For instance, had it been just a brown moth—there are so many of these
and most of them good to eat—how was it to be distinguished from others?
But such a get-up as _that_—black and white wings and a black and orange
body—once seen it was not to be forgotten. It was like the red flag at a
rifle range, warning one off, and this is the theory of warning
coloration. So Professor Wheeler, as he rode through the deserts of
Wyoming, with the moths all about him, resolved to test this theory
which had lived for a long time, and still goes on living a good deal on
trust. “He dismounted from his horse and proceeded to masticate the body
of one of the moths. To his astonishment the little flavour that it
contained was mild and pleasant, one may almost say nut-like.”[111]
Perhaps it may be thought that, on the “_de gustibus_” principle, what
is pleasant to a human being might be disagreeable to a bird or a
lizard; but Professor Wheeler tried another experiment. “Another
day-flying moth, common in our eastern States, has deep black wings,
each adorned with a pair of large yellow spots, and there is a dash of
orange on its legs. It certainly cannot be a mimetic species (if it
were, of course, one would not expect it to be nasty) as there is no
other day-flying moth which could serve as its model. Several of these
moths were given to some lizards that had previously been well fed on
house-flies and could not, therefore, be very hungry. The moths were
seized at once, and devoured, with evident signs of relish.”[111]

As a result of these experiments Professor Wheeler concludes that
“naturalists should be more careful in imputing nauseous or disagreeable
qualities to some conspicuously coloured animals,” and he suggests that
“if every field entomologist could only bring himself to repeat the
writer’s experiment on one of many cases of ‘flaunted nauseousness’ and
place his taste impressions on record, we should in the course of time
have a really valuable body of evidence, for we can hardly assume that
beasts, birds, and reptiles can find things ‘nauseous’ which are quite
tasteless, or even pleasant, to the human palate.”[111] “_Il n’y a pas
de réplique à cela_,” and how it is that so simple a plan did not occur
to Mr. Bates during all the eleven years he was on the Amazon it is not
very easy to imagine. On the whole, perhaps, it may be said that the
reason why certain butterflies are imitated by other butterflies has not
been so satisfactorily settled as the fact that they are so imitated.
But, on the other hand, there is some—perhaps much—evidence of the truth
of Bates’s theory, and, moreover, that theory is in itself so plausible
that it seems to require a good deal of evidence to overthrow it.

It is not only in South America that butterflies dress up like one
another. Instances similar to those here given occur also in Africa and
the Malay Archipelago, as well as in other parts of the world. There is
even one doubtful case in England, both the copy and original being
moths. Moths, especially the day-flying ones, are represented in these
phenomena as well as butterflies, which are sometimes imitated by them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXI


    Sights of the forest—A butterfly bridge—Bird-winged
      butterflies—“What’s in a name?”—Scientific
      sensibility—Resemblance _v._ mimicry—A convenient wrong
      word—Beauty in nature—Nuptial display—Strange
      counter-theory—_Lucus a non lucendo_—Reasoning by
      contraries—True in Topsy-turvydom—Butterfly courtship—Form
      and colour—A curious suggestion—Powers of defective
      eyesight.

THOUGH the principle of protective resemblance, as explained in the last
chapter, will account for the colours and markings of those butterflies
which imitate the _Heliconidæ_, it does not explain how the _Heliconidæ_
themselves came to be as they are; for in nature every mark and line and
shade has a meaning, and has come into existence by virtue of some law
or another. Beauty itself, independently of any _arrière pensée_, as we
may call it—remembering those flower-resembling spiders—requires to be
explained.

Nor are the _Heliconidæ_ themselves, though gaudily dressed showy
butterflies, anything like so beautiful as many others; for instance, as
the _Morphos_, those giants of their kind, who sweep like stars through
the tropical forests on wings whose whole broad surface is blue, but a
blue that flashes like a drawn sword and has a hundred glints and
gleamings of ever-varying light. High-fliers they are for the most part,
keeping to the tops of the trees, but every morning, and always at the
same time, they make a descent into the glades and alleys of the forest,
where for a little they flap lazily backwards and forwards, now in
eclipse, now flashing forth into sunlight, as though to flaunt their
beauties in the face of the lower world. Such openings in the primeval
forest are often made by the fall of great trees—for even where the axe
is not there is death in the midst of life—and as these majestic insects
sail high above them in a world of air and light, their shadows fall
upon the place beneath, and trace their course along the ground. When
the sun’s rays strike into them, such clearings become the gathering
grounds of various butterflies. Besides the great _Morphos_, the
flashing of whose wings in the sunlight can be seen sometimes a quarter
of a mile away,[112] various species of _Heliconeas_—the one we have
just been reading about—whose black wings are in some species spotted
with scarlet, in others with white or blue, waltz about the bushes or
undergrowth, “dancing in the chequered shade”; fritillaries somewhat
like our own, but of larger size and more effective colouring, fly
higher up, about the tree-trunks, whilst over the ground itself,
carpeted as it often is with flowers fallen from the leafy world above,
and scenting the air, ghost-like butterflies, whose clear, transparent
wings are without any colouring matter, ceaselessly hover and flit.

Wherever there is a river, many-coloured armies, bivouacked amidst its
various shoals and reefs, sit sucking water through, the moist particles
of the sand, whilst others, in even greater numbers, pass and repass
from one bank to another, making, however wide the waterway, an aerial
fluttering bridge. Other butterflies, also denizens of the great
Brazilian or Central American forests, have broad white wings, shot with
a satiny lustre, whilst those of yet another are like glass, with one
opaque spot of violet and blue, in the midst of each of them. In flight
this spot is the only part that can be seen, and it looks, Bates tells
us, “like the wandering petal of a flower.”[113] There are
swallow-tailed butterflies, too, whose livery of deep, soft green, and
deeper velvet black, set off with roseate hues, is amongst the richest
of all—“rich, not gaudy,” so at least I should term it, for I have seen
it, putting flowers to shame, on the lower slopes of the Himalayas. Here
these butterflies—double the size of our _Machaon_, and of another
shape, with racquet-rather than swallow-tails, flew on the open
hillside, courting the sun, but in Brazil they keep to the forest
depths, where, like Una, they “make a sunshine in the shady place.”

The butterflies of South America are almost rivalled—quite they cannot
be—by those of the Malay Archipelago. Here we have the great Bird-winged
Butterfly, discovered by Dr. Wallace, who calls it “elegant,” and
bestows upon it a name (_Ornithoptera Brookeana_) which is not quite
that.[114] However, “What’s in a name? That which we call a
_Brookeana_,” etc.—we must reverse the proposition. There is no
describing such a creature—at least, not convincingly. Suffice it to say
that its wings “almost resemble those of a sphinx moth in shape,” and
are deep, velvety black, but lit up with a band of green feather-like
markings, so brilliant and lovely that they reminded its discoverer “of
the wing-coverts of the Mexican trogon laid upon velvet”[114]—and that
for anyone who has seen a trogon, even stuffed and dried, is to say
enough. Besides this adornment the great _Brookeana_ has “a broad
neck-collar of vivid crimson and a few delicate white touches on the
outer margins of the hind wings.”[114] Another _Ornithoptera_ without
the _Brookeana_ is “the largest, the most perfect, and the most
beautiful of butterflies.” The two last, however, are matter of opinion,
and I should think myself that a _Morpho_ with its azure wings,
sometimes seven inches across, and flashing a quarter of a mile away,
would run—or fly—it hard. Then there is a yet more gorgeous species of
“Bird-winged Butterfly,” with wings equalling or even exceeding the
_Morpho’s_ in expanse, whose ample surface is divided between flame-like
orange and a black so deep, rich, and velvety that it seems to glow—“the
pride of the Eastern tropics, one of the most gorgeously coloured
butterflies in the world.”[115]

This was the butterfly that gave Dr. Wallace a headache, “so great was
the excitement produced by what will appear to most people a very
inadequate cause.”[115] Surely not; for the cause here alluded to was
not the insect’s beauty—which had been seen before, free and
untrammelled, without any such ill-consequence—but its capture and
anticipated transference to the cyanide bottle. It was not mere æsthetic
emotion, therefore, that produced the headache, but scientific
enthusiasm, of which no man need feel ashamed. It is easy for us on such
occasions to mistake our feelings, but the clue to them, I think, is
this, that however beautiful a creature may be, and however appreciative
we may think ourselves of such beauty, yet if we resolve, in the true
interests of science, to take that creature’s life, then the scientific
spirit must be far stronger in us than mere admiration of its beauty.
This test I would apply to another account which Dr. Wallace gives us of
the capture of “one of the most magnificent insects that the world
contains.” “I trembled,” he says, “with excitement as I saw it coming
majestically towards me, and could hardly believe I had really succeeded
in my stroke till I had taken it out of the net and was gazing, lost in
admiration, at the velvet black and brilliant green of its wings—seven
inches across—its golden body, and crimson breast. It is true I had seen
similar insects in cabinets at home, but it is quite another thing to
capture such oneself—to feel it struggling between one’s fingers, and to
gaze upon its fresh and living beauty, a bright gem shining out amid the
silent gloom of a dark and tangled forest. The village of Dobbo held
that evening at least one contented man.”[116] When we consider that the
“fresh and living beauty” was caught for the very sake of being made
dead and mouldy, and that the “bright gem” which would otherwise have
continued to flash in the forest was about to become one of those very
same specimens that had been looked at with such an inferior degree of
interest, we must admit, I think, that the higher of two passions was
predominant here, and that the author, in dwelling only upon the other
and lower one—mere delight of the eye—has done himself less than
justice.

Mr. Bates, without headaches, has given us some very pleasing pictures
of butterfly-life in the tropics, and in doing so he has instinctively,
as it were, kept the killing and capturing in the background. “The
number and variety of gaily-tinted butterflies,” he tells us, “sporting
about in this grove on sunny days, were so great that the bright moving
flakes of colour gave quite a character to the physiognomy of the place.
It was impossible to walk far without disturbing flocks of them from the
damp sand at the edge of the water, where they congregate to imbibe the
moisture. They were of almost all colours, sizes, and shapes. I noticed
here altogether eighty species belonging to twenty-two different genera.
It is a singular fact that, with very few exceptions, all the
individuals of these various species thus sporting in sunny places were
of the male sex; their partners, which are much more soberly dressed and
immensely less numerous than the males, being confined to the shades of
the woods. Every afternoon, as the sun was getting low, I used to notice
these gaudy, sunshine-loving swains trooping off to the forest, where I
suppose they would find their sweethearts and wives.”[117] What a
delightful scene! Here, “next to the very common sulphur-yellow and
orange-coloured kinds, the most abundant were about a dozen species of
_Eunica_, of large size, conspicuous from their liveries of glossy dark
blue and purple. A superbly adorned creature, the _Callithea Markii_,
having wings of a thick texture, coloured sapphire blue and orange, was
only an occasional visitor. On certain days, when the weather was very
calm, two small gilded green species literally swarmed on the sands,
their glittering wings lying wide open on the flat surface.”[117]

Such, then, are the colours of butterflies, and, as may be imagined,
comparatively few of these gorgeous liveries have been acquired through
the principle of protective resemblance—using the term in its widest
sense, to include those cases where one species becomes, as it were, the
double or wraith of another. Mimicry is the word which, by a ludicrous
process of false reasoning, naturalists have convinced themselves it is
right to apply to this particular kind of resemblance, and no other one;
though why a butterfly should _mimic_ another butterfly and only
_resemble_ a leaf, “_quien sabe?_” as the Spaniards say. The principal
reason adduced for this misuse of language, viz. that the wrong word is
more convenient than any right one, providing us with the useful series,
_mimic_, _mimicry_, _mimetic_, _mimicker_, _mimicked_, _mimicking_,
obviously applies to the one case as well as the other, and if it is an
advantage to be absurd in one way, surely it is a double one to be
absurd in two. On these grounds I would suggest to naturalists that,
having broken down the proper and natural confinements of the word in
question, they should rather extend its use than limit it, to the extent
even of calling their children “mimetic forms,” should they happen to
resemble them, and thinking twice before punishing a son for merely
“mimicking” his father.

But, leaving this, how—to take the jargon as one finds it—are the
glorious colours of butterflies to be explained when they are due
neither to protective resemblance, which is not mimicry, though it very
much resembles it, nor to mimicry, which is distinct from protective
resemblance, though mimicking it exactly? Certainly neither of these
will do to account for uncopied hues and patterns, which are like
nothing in the world but their own loveliness, unless, indeed, it be the
rival glories of the most resplendent birds. Still less will aggressive
resemblance—though, as we see, it can make spiders look like
flowers—explain them. The great governing cause which produces such
effects as these, as well as most others in nature, is natural
selection; but we must look beyond natural selection even, if we wish to
understand all the beauty that we see in the animal world, and
especially the higher developments of it.

Darwin, as we know, was the great demonstrator—though not the first
conceiver—of the law of natural selection,[118] and on this he might
have cried “_Nunc dimittis_” and retired, so to speak, leaving someone
else to find out the other law; but instead of that he went on and
demonstrated that too. This other law, the evidence for which is really
overwhelming, and has never been met by anything better than a conceited
over-estimation of human superiority, wrapped up in a cloud of wrong
reasoning, is that of sexual selection, which implies that, in the
choice of their mates, animals, like ourselves, are guided by some sort
of preference; and as this with them—again like ourselves—is usually
determined by the element of beauty, the most beautiful partners are
being constantly selected, and species in consequence become more and
more beautiful. This process, however, is usually confined to the males,
they being the eager wooers, whilst the females only wait to be courted,
and then shyly and modestly choose—such, at least, is the supposition.
This masculine beauty is often inherited by that sex only to which it is
so useful, but in other cases it is transmitted to the female also.
Thus, to take birds, where the results of the law of sexual selection
are on the whole most pronounced, we have, on the one hand, the
pheasants and birds of paradise, where the male alone is resplendent,
whilst in the trogons, parrots, and many other species the beauty is
common to both the sexes. As is well known, the males of various highly
ornate birds are accustomed to make the most extraordinary display of
their beauty before the females, making the most of the parts most
richly decorated, assuming just such attitudes as are required in order
to give these their full advantage, and, in fact, taking pains and
trouble in a high degree and of a very special and peculiar kind, which
must either be directed to an end which seems perfectly plain and
apparent, or else so much waste of time—due to no special cause and
without any particular meaning—an alternative which the opponents of
sexual selection do not in the least mind accepting.

To give one instance of what is called nuptial display in birds—for it
will serve to illustrate what Darwin supposes to take place with some
insects also, as well as forming a basis of comparison with what has
been more carefully observed in the case of spiders—Belt in his often
quoted work gives us the following pretty picture of humming-bird
courtship. Speaking of a beautiful blue, green, and white species
(_Florisuga mellivora_), he says: “I have seen the female sitting
quietly on a branch, and two males displaying their charms in front of
her. One would shoot up like a rocket, then suddenly expanding the
snow-white tail like an inverted parachute, slowly descend in front of
her, turning round gradually to show off both back and front. The effect
was heightened by the wings being invisible from a distance of a few
yards, both from their great velocity of movement and from not having
the metallic lustre of the rest of the body. The expanded white tail
covered more space than all the rest of the bird, and was evidently the
grand feature in the performance. Whilst one was descending, the other
would shoot up and come slowly down expanded. The entertainment would
end in a fight between the two performers; but whether the most
beautiful or the most pugnacious was the accepted suitor I know
not.”[119]

Here the display, as well as the intention, seems evident enough, and it
is not a whit more so than in hundreds of other cases collected by
Darwin during his lifetime, and which have been largely added to since
his death. As the hen is constantly present during these performances,
and as she has been known on various occasions to show a strong
partiality, or the reverse, to this or that male bird, we have here a
solid basis of observed fact on which to raise an hypothesis. On what
facts the counter one rests, as propounded by Dr. Wallace, viz. that
colour and antics are produced by superior vigour resident in the male,
it is less easy to see, unless, indeed, such as point in a quite
opposite direction may, on a sort of _lucus a non lucendo_ principle, be
held to support it. If this be conceded, then, indeed, we have a
plentiful crop, nor need we any longer feel sceptical because the eagle,
say—that bird of fierce energy—does not flash out like all the crown
jewels together as it descends on its prey, or because the swift, whose
vital force is, perhaps, even greater, leaves no train of jewelled light
to die all day, behind it, on the air. Nor need we wonder that the
trogons, though as resplendent as the swifts, swallows[120] and eagles
are dull-coloured, should be as lazy and sluggish as these are
energetic: nor that, whereas the females of some humming-birds are
sober-suited, those of others, though their vigour would seem to be in
no way superior, are as gem-like as their mates: or that the males as
well as the females of some wholly dull-coloured ones, and of many other
plain birds, seem bursting with vigour, and indulge in all sorts of
strange antics and dances: that a cock partridge, for instance, seems as
vigorous as a cock pheasant, and that bright colours and pugnacity are
dissociated in such tremendous fighters as the ruff, the coot, and the
blackcock. Multiply such instances by the score or the hundred—as can
easily be done—and if only the above-stated principle be granted, we get
more and more proof of the correctness of a theory to which facts, if
dealt with in the more usual way, would be almost instantly fatal. After
all, this would be a more satisfactory mode of procedure than that of
tolerating a travesty on the strength of a high reputation. There is
such a principle in nature as the _lucus a non lucendo_ one, so, as we
admit the word mimicry in a false sense—because it is convenient—why not
admit that? It would be not one whit less convenient—for the theory.

But, handling facts in another way, can we explain the beautiful colours
of butterflies as we explain the brilliant plumage of birds—by sexual
selection, that is to say? Of this there is not so much direct evidence
as could be wished, for butterfly courtship is a long affair, and, for
various reasons, is not so easy to watch under natural conditions, as in
the case of birds, though this, too, is often beset with difficulties.
We know, however, that the male is often much more beautiful than the
female, that he pirouettes around her, and that she remains often “icy
insensible”—in fact refuses him—which certainly implies a power of
choice. Rival males, too, will “whirl round each other with the greatest
rapidity, and appear to be incited by the greatest ferocity.”[121] That
butterflies, like bees, perceive and are attracted by colours is well
known, and it would be strange, indeed, if they were not alive to the
many very beautiful and complex patterns on their own wings, when these
cannot have been evolved through any principle of protection—since they
resemble or suggest nothing—when, in fact, if not beauty, it is
difficult to see the object aimed at. Yet the strange suggestion has
been made that, though butterflies see colours, they cannot see form,
that their sight is defective in some peculiar kind of way. But if form
is outline—and if not, what is it?—where is the distinction, seeing that
the beginning and leaving off of a colour or of two or more colours must
make an outline, and therefore a form? If we see the colours of a
pattern where the one ends and the other begins, we see that pattern,
and on the other hand, if we could not distinguish one colour from
another, or colour from something uncoloured—as, say, the air—we should
be blind to colour, as well as to form. Form can hardly be called a
thing of itself. It is rather the line of demarcation between two or
more things, so that, if each of these is clearly perceived, the form or
outline which their juxtaposition makes must be also perceived. Assuming
that butterflies see the beautiful arrangements of colour—eyes, spots,
bands, lines, etc.—in such a way as can alone account for their being
there to see—as well as we do, that is to say—then it is absurd to
imagine that they have no perception of form.

On what is this assertion based? Mr. Scudder relies on the following
facts: “Christy,” he tells us, “observed in Manitoba one of the
swallow-tails fluttering over the bushes, evidently in search of
flowers. As he watched it, it settled momentarily, and exactly as if it
had mistaken it for a yellow flower, on a twig of _Betula glandulosa_,
bearing withered leaves of a bright yellow colour.”[122] But might not
the association of ideas raised by a familiar colour in an insect’s mind
overpower for a moment its judgment? Might it not do so in the case of a
man also? And should we think a person very stupid who, for a moment,
mistaking a yellow leaf for a yellow flower, stretched out his hand to
pick it? Pooh! once again,[123] let us think of people who do foolish
things—kings, generals, cabinet ministers, servant-maids, etc.—not of
infallible persons. We should not be too severe—not “break a butterfly
on a wheel.”

Again—this is Mr. Scudder’s second instance: “Albert Müller records
seeing the blue Alexis of Europe fly towards a very small bit of pale
blue paper lying upon the grass, and stop within an inch or two of it,
as if to settle, doubtless mistaking it for another of its own
kind.”[124] Surely this is rather in favour of the butterfly’s sight
than otherwise, since it discovered its mistake and did not settle. Who,
too, can tell the precise moment at which the mistake was discovered,
since the piece of blue paper might have puzzled the butterfly—piqued
its curiosity to know what it was—even after it knew what it was not?
Thirdly, “Plateau has observed the small tortoise-shell butterfly fly
rapidly towards a cluster of artificial flowers.”[124] And who cannot be
taken in by artificial flowers? “Such examples as these,” says Mr.
Scudder, “seem to indicate that butterflies may perceive colour in mass,
but in no case indicate any further visual powers.”[124] To me they
indicate that butterflies can make mistakes. Mistakes rarely show one’s
perfections, but other indications of further visual powers are not
wanting. For instance, Mr. Scudder himself says: “One of my favourite
modes of showing this characteristic (inquisitiveness) to unbelieving
friends has been to toss my cap high in the air, when these butterflies
will often dart, dash at, and play around it as it begins again to
descend.”[124] How do they play around this moving object in the air if
it represents to them only “colour in mass,” and not a defined shape and
outline? Were it otherwise, they would fly right into it, and be carried
down with it sometimes on top of them. But if they see all parts of the
colour so that they can nicely avoid it, and sport about its periphery,
then they see the shape of the cap. Then, again, Mr. Scudder tells us:
“Many kinds are of a lively and even pugnacious disposition, and perch
themselves upon the tip of a twig, or on a stone, or some such outlook,
and dash at the first butterfly that passes, _especially if it be one of
their own species_;[125] then the two advance and retreat, forwards and
backwards, time and again, circle round each other with amazing
celerity, all the while, perchance, mounting skywards, until suddenly
they part, dash to the ground, and the now quiet pursuer again stations
himself on the very spot he quitted for the fray.”[126] How does he do
_that_ without accurate eyesight, with good defining power?—to which,
indeed, the whole performance bears witness. Elsewhere, too, this
pronounced characteristic of returning to the exact spot, left some
little time ago, is dwelt upon. To me it seems a complete upsettal of
the defective eyesight theory, or, since good eyesight could do no more,
what does such defectiveness matter?

The following description also, which Bates gives us, of butterfly-life
by the Amazons, does not suggest that any of these bright-day-lovers,
these children of the sun, need write an “_Apologia pro oculis suis_.”
“The fine showy _Heliconii_,” he says, “often assemble in small parties,
or by twos and threes, apparently to sport together or perform a kind of
dance” (my “dancing in the chequered shade,” therefore, was no inapt
quotation). “I believe the parties are composed chiefly of males. The
sport begins generally between a single pair. They advance, retire,
glide right and left in face of each other, wheel round to a
considerable distance, again approach, and so on; a third joins in, then
a fourth, or more. _They never touch_;[127] when too many are
congregated a general flutter takes place, and they all fly off, to fall
in again by pairs shortly afterwards.”[128] Lastly, Belt tells us this:
“Here a large spider built strong, yellow, silken webs joined one on to
the other, so as to make a complete curtain of web, in which were
entangled many large butterflies, generally forest species, caught when
flying across the clearing. I was at first surprised to find that the
kinds that frequent open places were not caught, although they abounded
on low white-flowered shrubs close to the webs; but on getting behind
them and trying to frighten them within the silken curtain, their
instinct taught them to avoid it, for, although startled, they threaded
their way through open spaces and between the webs with the greatest
ease.”[129] If a butterfly with defective eyesight can thread its way
between spiders’ webs, so as never to be caught, “with the greatest
ease,” “why, then, say an old man can do somewhat”—but it must be
without spectacles.

  In 1813 Dr. Wells, first amongst the moderns, conceived, or at least
  formulated in writing, the idea of natural selection; but Aristotle,
  as is usual in such cases, had anticipated him as well as Darwin,
  Wallace, and one or two others, and that in a very unmistakable
  sentence (see footnote on first page of the “Historical Sketch” in
  _The Origin of Species_). It would seem, however, that no one of these
  conceptions was influenced by any previous one. Of sexual selection
  Darwin seems to have been the discoverer as well as, in the opinion of
  many, the demonstrator.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              CHAPTER XXII


    Beautiful spiders—The “Peckham paper”—Spider courtship—Male
      antics and love-dances—Occasional accidents—Strength of the
      evidence—The one explanation—Darwin’s last words—His theory
      established.

SPIDERS, as we have seen, may attain beauty by getting more and more
like flowers, but beauty is not the attribute with which they are
principally connected in our minds. Rather they are a synonym of
something uncouth and horrid-looking, as well as of skill and
persevering industry. For those of us, however, who have lived in the
tropics they have other associations, for here, side by side with the
most hideous of monsters, huge, dark, and hairy, are found others, small
and gem-like, flashing indeed with beauty, the representatives in their
order of the humming-birds, those “living sunbeams” of the Indians,
amongst birds. These lovely little spiders belong to a particular
family, the _Attidæ_, which has been placed by common consent at the
head of all the others, since, whilst structurally, and in other
respects, it is inferior to none, “it contains among its 1,500 species
the greatest amount of sexual differentiation and the highest
development of ornamentation.” Dr. Wallace, after noticing “their
immense numbers, variety, and beauty,” in tropical South America, says,
“Many of them are so exquisitely coloured as to resemble jewels rather
than spiders”;[130] and again, in his work on the Malay Archipelago, he
alludes to them as “perfect gems of beauty.”[131]

These little radiant spiders live amongst flowers and foliage, and here
they chase such small insects as their size allows them to cope with.
Besides running, they make little leaps into the air, and so, if they
can manage it, come down on their prey, for which reason they are often
called “jumping spiders.” This is a very different mode of action from
that of remaining perfectly still till a butterfly or other insect
happens to settle on one, and it is accordingly instructive to find
that, great as is the beauty of these flower-haunting spiders, yet it
does not resemble that of the flowers amongst which it is displayed. The
iridescent flashes and sparkles more resemble those of the mineral than
of the vegetable world—where, indeed, they hardly exist—and must serve,
as well as their active movements, to point them out to their enemies
even amidst a background of flowers. It is not upon principles of
protection, therefore, or to acquire a dissembling resemblance that such
bright brilliancy has been developed in these little creatures.

Since, therefore, these spiders could not have become beautiful on any
principle of protective or aggressive resemblance, nor yet of warning
coloration, for which there would here be no opening, and had yet become
beautiful in a high degree, they seemed to Professor and Mrs. Peckham to
offer a good subject for the testing of the theory of sexual selection,
and deciding as to whether Darwin or Wallace was right in that matter.
After several months of careful, and often very laborious
observation—rewarded, however, by the most interesting results—they have
given their answer, and this answer, resting as it does on the most
irrefragable evidence, should be decisive for all time. It may safely be
asserted that anyone who, after reading the “Peckham paper,” as it may
well be called, is not convinced both that the male spiders of this
beautiful family woo the females by displaying their beauty before them,
and that the females carefully watch the display, accepting only such as
please them sufficiently and rejecting the others, never will be
convinced, since only by the spiders actually speaking, which is not
likely to happen, could the evidence be bettered. If, indeed, the female
had been heard to say “Pretty i’ faith,” or “You are a fine young man,”
just before her actions gave clear, or still clearer indication that
this was in her mind, had she murmured “Take me” as she let herself be
taken, and had the male asked, after the way common in novels, “Was it
my abdomen or the stripes on my palpi that made you first fall in love
with me?” then, perhaps, even those who believe that the higher
spiritual love is for man alone would have been converted—and yet I know
not, since assertions so unlikely in themselves might have flung doubt
on the whole paper.

But, however this may be, the evidence now offered us in favour of
Darwin’s views can never be strengthened except in this way, so that, as
far as proof is possible in such a matter, sexual selection as a law and
principal agent of beauty in nature is now proved, though, at the same
time, several more facts are added to those upon which the counter
hypothesis seems based, and which would certainly prove it in
Topsy-turvydom. To take these first, the authors of the paper in
question have sought to apply to spiders “the hypothesis that the
brighter colour of the male is due to his greater activity and vital
force.” “Beginning,” they say, “with the most brilliant family—the
_Attidæ_—we find that the females are, with few exceptions, larger,
stronger, and more pugnacious than the males. Thus we placed two females
of _Phidippus morsitans_ together in a glass jar. No sooner did they
observe each other than both prepared for battle. Eyeing each other with
a firm glance, they slowly advanced, and in a moment were locked in
deadly combat. Within a few seconds the cephalothorax of one was pierced
by the fang of the other, and with a convulsive tremor it relaxed its
hold and fell dead. We placed together eight pairs in all, and in each
instance the fight was short and even to the death. Subsequently we put
in a well-developed male, which, though smaller, was compactly built and
apparently strong enough to bring the virago to terms, but to our
surprise he seemed alarmed and retreated, trying to avoid her. She,
however, followed him up and finally killed him.”[132]

So much for _Phidippus morsitans_. Coming to _Dendryphantes elegans_,
the authors, who kept a number together in a large box, “were much
struck by the greater quarrelsomeness of the females. They would
frequently go out of their way to chase each other, and they were much
more circumspect in approaching each other than were the males.”[133]
Again they say, “Valkenaer, Menge, Hentz, and others give numerous
instances where the male meets his death through the fierceness of his
mate. In fact the danger is so imminent that after a successful
courtship it is the habit in several genera (e.g. _Epeira_ and
_Tegnaria_) for the male to retire with precipitation from the web of
the female as a reasonable precaution; yet the rule is for the male to
be more ‘beautified’ than the female.”[133]

Coming now to the actual courtship of these brilliant spiders, the
authors placed pairs of several species in square wooden boxes, having a
cloth bottom, on which they could easily move about. One of the species
experimented on was _Dendryphantes elegans_ mentioned only a moment
ago—such a name is not to be forgotten—whose beauty is thus described:
“The male is covered with iridescent scales, his general colour being
green. In the female the colouring is dark but iridescent, and in
certain lights has lovely rosy tints. In the sunlight both shine with
the metallic splendour of humming-birds. The male alone has a
superciliary fringe of hairs on either side of his head, his first legs
being also larger and more adorned than those of his mate.”[133]

Yet the extra vigour from which this special growth is supposed to have
sprung has not, as we shall see, affected his growth in general. “The
female is much larger, and her loveliness is accompanied by an extreme
irritability of temper, which the male seems to regard as a constant
menace to his safety; but his eagerness being great and his manner
devoted and tender, he gradually overcomes her opposition. Her change of
mood is only brought about after much patient courting on his
part”.[133] And now comes the minutely interesting description of this
iridescent, _couleur de rose_ courtship. “While from three to five
inches distant from her he begins to wave his plumy legs in a way that
reminds one of a windmill. She eyes him fiercely, and he keeps at the
proper distance for a long time. If he comes close she dashes at him and
he quickly retreats. Sometimes he becomes bolder, and when within an
inch pauses with the first legs outstretched before him, not raised, as
is common in other species; the palpi also (in insects it would be the
antennæ) are held stiffly out in front, with the points together. Again
she drives him off, and so the play continues. Now the male grows
excited, as he approaches her, and while still several inches away
whirls completely around and around; pausing, he runs closer, and begins
to make his abdomen quiver as he stands on tiptoe in front of her.
Prancing from side to side, he grows bolder and bolder, while she seems
less fierce, and yielding to the excitement, lifts up her magnificently
coloured abdomen, holding it at one time vertically and at another
sideways to him. She no longer rushes at him, but retreats a little as
he approaches. At last he comes close to her, lying flat, with his first
legs stretched out and quivering. With the tips of his front legs he
gently pats her; this seems to arouse the old demon of resistance, and
she drives him back. Again and again he pats her, with a caressing
movement, gradually creeping nearer and nearer, which she now permits
without resistance,”[133] and so on,

               “Till the happy ‘yes’ falters from her mouth,”

almost as exciting, though not quite so detailed, as the climax scene of
a latter-day novel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: 1. A solitary spider dancing before its mate.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: 2. A cockroach attacking an astonished scorpion. Its
weapons are the spines on its powerful hind legs.]

Of the courtship of another species—_Habrocestum splendens_—we have the
following account: “The male, a magnificent fellow when we first caught
him, displayed for a long time before the female. He began by advancing
a few inches before her, and then backing off again, this being repeated
many times. After a while he settled down under a little web in the
corner. The female, troubled by this indifferent treatment, advanced
towards him; he came out and she fell back. This play was kept up for
some time, but at length the male began his courting in earnest. When
within a few inches of her he began a rapid dance from side to side,
raising the whole body high on the tips of the legs, the first pair
being directed forward and the palpi clasped together, with the abdomen
turned to one side and lifted up. After a short dance he stood
motionless, striking an attitude and remaining quiet for half a minute.
Then he turned his back on her, moving irregularly about, with his legs
forward and his palpi vibrating. Again he dances sideways before her,
strutting and showing off like a peacock, or whirling around and
around.”[133]

On such occasions the female would “commonly move nearer to him and
appear much excited herself. We at first supposed that this turning
around was accidental, but it happened so regularly at a certain stage
of the courtship that we concluded it was an important part of the
display, serving to better show off his brilliant abdomen.”[133] Of this
there can hardly be a doubt, since on every occasion the male spider,
whatever his species, assumed such attitudes as displayed his best
points to the best advantage—a fact which recalls the following passage
in one of Darwin’s letters: “I am very glad to hear of your cases of the
two sets of _Hesperiadæ_ (a butterfly), which display their wings
differently, according to which surface is coloured. I cannot believe
that such display is accidental or purposeless.”

How glad, and more than glad, would Darwin have been to have read the
tale of these spiders! It is, indeed, one of those ironies of fate, of
which the world is so full, that he did not live to see this
demonstration—for it is no less—of the truth of his most original and
elevating views; elevating they may be well called, since they allow to
the animal world an æsthetic faculty, the power, once thought
exclusively human, of appreciating beauty. It is curious how willing
many are to exalt humanity at the expense of all other beings. The
higher faculties they like, and perception of the beautiful they like,
and spirituality—especially in love—they like very much indeed; but they
only like these things in their own species. That is to say, conceit
lies at the bottom of all this exaltation. Such man-worshippers would
not have more of a good thing in the world, but less, so that they may
have all there is of it. On such grounds the war against evolution was
waged, and its last struggles are against sexual selection. The body has
been given up, but the spirit, which touches us yet more nearly, is
still fiercely defended.

In _Hasarius Hoyi_ “the sexes are very different, the male being the
more conspicuous of the two. In his dances, the male has several
movements. Most commonly he goes from side to side, with his first legs
obliquely up. At other times he twists the abdomen to one side, and,
bending low on the other, goes first in one direction for about two
inches, and then, reversing, circles to the opposite point. The females
are very savage, especially with each other, and even the members of the
sterner sex are not always free from danger when paying their
preparatory addresses. Once we saw a female eagerly watching a prancing
male, and, as he slowly approached her, she raised her legs as if to
strike him, but he, nothing daunted by her unkindly reception of his
attentions, advanced even nearer, when she seized him and seemed to hold
him by the head for a minute—he struggling. At last he freed himself and
ran away.”[133] Yet “this same male, after a time, courted her
successfully.” That so much savagery has to be overcome in the female,
and finally is overcome by these dances, shows how powerfully she must
be affected by them. Of another and previously undescribed species, “a
dozen or more males, and about half as many females,” were found by the
authors “assembled together” under natural conditions. “The males were
rushing hither and thither, dancing opposite now one female and now
another. Often two males met each other, when a short passage of arms
followed. The males were very quarrelsome, and had frequent fights, but
we never found that they were injured. Indeed, after having watched
hundreds of seemingly terrible battles between the males of this and
other species, the conclusion has been forced upon us that they are all
sham affairs, gotten up for the purpose of displaying before the
females, who commonly stand by, interested spectators.”[133]

Then there is a small ant-like species, who, “unlike most of the _Attid_
males, keeps all his feet on the ground during his courtship. Raising
himself on the tips of the posterior six, he slightly inclines his head
downwards by bending his front legs, their convex surface being always
turned forward. His abdomen is lifted vertically, so that it is at a
right angle to the rest of his body. In this position he sways from side
to side. After a moment he drops the abdomen, runs a few steps nearer
the female, and then tips his body and begins to sway again. Now he runs
in one direction, now in another, pausing every few moments to rock from
side to side and to bend his brilliant legs, so that she may look full
at them.”[133] What can be clearer than this? And here, indeed, the
authors remark: “We were much impressed by the fact that the attitude
taken by the males served perfectly to show off their fine points to the
female. We had never known the male of this species until the day that
we caught this one and put him into the mating-box, and it was while
studying his courtship that we noticed how he differed from the female
in his iridescent first legs. He could not have chosen a better position
than the one he took to make a display.”[133]

Elsewhere, in another experiment with the same species, the authors,
after remarking that if these specially modified front legs were held in
any other way the effect of the flattened and iridescent surface would
be lost, go on to say: “This is a good example of what we have again and
again observed in the courtship of the _Attidæ_: that whatever fine
points of colour or structure the male possesses, his actions before the
female display them to the very best advantage. In whatever part the
special merit may lie, he sedulously strives to bring it to the notice
and impress its beauty upon the mind of the female to whom he is paying
his addresses.”[133] As for the female, she is throughout described as
watching the male eagerly and with the greatest interest, and that this
interest is not always felt from the first, but is aroused by degrees,
becoming, at last, so strong as to suspend for a time the natural
inclination to assault and eat the wooer, is all the more significant.
That there are dangers in these courtships there has been some
indication, “but worse remains behind.” _Phidippus rufus_ was caught
once and eaten in an unguarded moment, and whilst _Phidippus morsitans_
was waving his particularly handsome first pair of legs, “thickly
adorned with white hairs,” precisely the same thing happened to him.
Still, on the whole, such incidents are exceptional.

Particularly interesting is the account given of the courtship of
_Saitis pulex_, a male of which species was introduced into a box
already occupied by a female. “He saw her as she stood perfectly still,
twelve inches away; the glance seemed to excite him, and he moved
towards her; when some four inches from her he stood still, and then
began the most remarkable performances that an amorous male could offer
to an admiring female. She eyed him eagerly, changing her position from
time to time, so that he might be always in view. He, raising his whole
body on one side, by straightening out the legs, and lowering it on the
other by folding the first two pairs of legs up and under, leant so far
over as to be in danger of losing his balance, which he only maintained
by sidling rapidly towards the lowered side. The palpus, too, on this
side, was turned back to correspond to the direction of the legs nearest
it. He moved in a semicircle for about two inches, and then instantly
reversed the position of the legs and circled in the opposite direction,
gradually approaching nearer and nearer to the female. Now she dashes
towards him, while he, raising his first pair of legs, extends them
upward and forward as if to hold her off, but withal slowly retreats.
Again and again he circles from side to side, she gazing towards him in
a softer mood, evidently admiring the grace of his antics. This is
repeated until we have counted one hundred and eleven circles made by
the ardent little male. Now he approaches nearer and nearer, and when
almost within reach, whirls madly around and around her, she joining and
whirling with him in a giddy maze. Again he falls back and resumes his
semicircular motions with his body tilted over; she, all excitement,
lowers her head and raises her body so that it is almost vertical; both
draw nearer”[133]—and the male, now, for some short period is in no
danger of being eaten.

Lastly—for this must be the last example—we have a species—_Astia
vittata_—in which the male is represented by two differing forms, each
of which dances before the female in its own particular way. One of
these forms is red, like the female, which he resembles in other
respects, so that this must be taken as the original specific type. The
other, which has evidently been developed from it, in deference to the
æsthetic preferences of the female, is black, with the special adornment
of three tufts of hair on his head, or thereabouts, that part of a
spider which is termed the cephalothorax. These tufts stick bolt
upright, rising together, but separating about half-way up, and give to
their fortunate possessor—for, as we shall see, he is fortunate—a very
spruce and dapper appearance. Looked at dispassionately, if one can do
that, they are certainly as handsome as moustaches, and there is no
reason in the nature of things why they should not be admired as much.
So, indeed, they are, and that the admiration bestowed upon each is of
an equally high nature I, at any rate, see no reason to doubt.

The following description will show what a spider with moustaches can
achieve: “The _vittata_ form, which is quite like the female, when he
approaches her raises his first legs either so that they point forward
or upward, keeping his palpi stiffly outstretched, while the tip of his
abdomen is bent to the ground. This position he commonly takes when
three or four inches away. While he retains this attitude he keeps
curving and waving his legs in a very curious manner. Frequently he
raises only one of the legs of the first pair, running all the time from
side to side. As he draws nearer to the female he lowers his body to the
ground, and, dropping his legs also, places the two anterior pairs so
that the tips touch in front, the proximal joints being turned almost at
a right angle to the body. Now he glides in a semicircle before the
female, sometimes advancing, sometimes receding, until at last she
accepts his addresses. The _niger_ form, evidently a later development,
is much the more lively of the two, and whenever the two varieties were
seen to compete for a female the black one was successful.”[133]

Here, surely, is a final answer to those assertions as to indifference
on the part of the female, which, though made in the teeth of
probability, are often, on account of the difficulties of observation,
almost impossible to disprove. Here are two kinds of males, one lively
and with moustaches, the other not so lively and without them; as the
first is always, or even, say, generally chosen, his appearance must be
preferred. Were it only his liveliness, as Dr. Wallace has suggested,
why should he have acquired another dress as well as another dance? or,
if the female can have a choice as between liveliness and slowness, as
between a jig and a minuet, why, in Heaven’s name, should she not have
one as between one get-up and another? Sexual selection might, I think,
be put to the test in this one species with its two male forms. Let but
a sufficient number of courtships be observed and reported on, and if
_niger_, in a large percentage of them, wins the day, choice on the part
of the female—the only link in the chain of evidence which it is at all
possible to deny—is a proved thing.

But to continue: “He—_niger_—is bolder in his manners (no wonder he
prevails), and we have never seen him assume the prone position, as the
red form did, when close to the female. He always held one or both of
the first legs high in the air, waving them wildly to and fro; or when
the female became excited, he stood perfectly motionless before her,
sometimes for a whole minute, seeming to fascinate her by the power of
his glance”[133]—greatly aided probably by the three tufts of hair
showing through the archway of the uplifted legs. Here, again, too, as
in some of the other species—perhaps all—“although the males were
continually waving their first legs at each other, their quarrels were
harmless. It was quite otherwise with the females, since they not only
kept the other sex in awe of them, but not infrequently in their battles
killed each other.”[133] As the males cannot win the females by
fighting, what have they to contend with effectively except these
curious, elaborate, and most interesting displays, the purpose of which
is so excessively obvious? On the other hand, the fact that the females
yield, almost against their nature, to these displays, that they are
slowly and gradually won through their means, is proof positive that
they like them, and if so, how is it possible that they should not like
one more or less than another? What, in fact, is choice but a greater or
less reaction to this stimulus or to that? The initial absurdity of
laying claim to a monopoly of such a capacity as this, either in our
matrimonial affairs, or any other matter in which animals participate,
has not been sufficiently dwelt upon.

Professor Poulton, in considering this case of _Astra vittata_ with its
two male forms, one of which is always chosen by the female in
preference to the other, remarks (with his own italics), “It must be
admitted that these facts afford the _strongest support_ to the theory
of Sexual Selection.”[134] He thus endorses—as anyone, I think, not
hard-set the other way, must endorse—the opinion of the authors of the
paper that “in the _Attidæ_ we have conclusive evidence that the females
pay close attention to the love dances of the males, and also that they
have not only the power, but the will, to exercise a choice among the
suitors for their favour,”[135] to which he adds this rider:
“Remembering that this conclusion has only been reached in the _Attidæ_
by the closest study, I think we may safely explain the smaller
confidence with which we can speak of other animals by the want of
sufficiently careful and systematic investigation.”

The process of the narrative having led, in the last chapter or two, to
a discussion of some of the ways in which insects become shaped and
coloured through natural selection, sexual selection seemed marked out
as the subject for this one. The reason why I have filled it with
extracts from a certain very interesting paper has been a better one
than that of saving myself trouble. That paper—the most important one
perhaps that has ever been written on the subject—is a wonderful
confirmation of Darwin’s views, but Darwin, as it appears to me, has not
benefited by it in the way that he ought to do in the popular mind.
There is no work that I know of, written upon merely popular lines, that
brings these facts forward, and yet I feel sure that to large numbers of
people, who yet do not care to read books avowedly scientific, they must
be extremely interesting, not only in themselves, but as allowing them
both to form a judgment on the subject, and on the correctness or
otherwise of Darwin’s views—for Darwin is an interesting and picturesque
figure far beyond the close borough of science.

Now the general more intelligent public who read, perhaps, widely, but
not very deeply or very specially, know that Darwin believed in two
forces—natural and sexual selection—by the joint action of which,
species, as he held, had been gradually modified and evolved, and they
know that the former of these two has been accepted by science, but that
to the latter there has been much more opposition, and that it is not—or
is not supposed to be—established like the other. Many, perhaps, may
have read Dr. Wallace’s _Darwinism_, a work in which Darwin’s most
distinctive and original view—that one whose conception, apparently, he
shared with nobody and on which he based much of the argument contained
in his _Descent of Man_—is considered and rejected in a way which makes
the title of the book misleading, surely, if not a somewhat comically
ludicrous misnomer. All those who have read it, as well as many who have
not, will be interested—they cannot fail to be—in the wonderful record
of spider courtships contained in these extracts, and having reflected
on them, they will, if I mistake not, be much more impressed with the
arguments _for_ this part of Darwinism than they were with those brought
against it in the book of that name.

All these latter arguments, by the way—the languor of swallows as
against the vitality of parrots, trogons, etc.—were well known to Darwin
himself; and as no one was, at the same time, more impartial in
considering, and more capable of correctly estimating, facts hostile to
his own theories, or which, at first sight, might seem to be so, it may
not be out of place to end this chapter with a reference to what he
thought of them. This we may gather from a statement contained in a
paper—the last, presumably, ever written by him—which was read before
the Zoological Society but a few hours before his death, and which is as
follows: “I may, perhaps, be here permitted to say that, after having
carefully weighed, to the best of my ability, the various arguments
which have been advanced against the principle of sexual selection, I
remain firmly convinced of its truth.”


------------------------------------------------------------------------


                             CHAPTER XXIII


    Web making spiders—Dangerous wooings—An unkind
      lady-love—Lizard-eating spiders—Enlightened curiosity—Rival
      entomologists—Instinct of resignation—A worm-eating
      spider—Alternative explanation—The dangers of
      patriotism—Trap-door spiders—Web-flying spiders—Spiders that
      nearly fly—Spider navigators—The raft and the diving-bell.

NONE of the spiders mentioned in the last chapter are web-makers. These
latter are not dancers; that is to say, the males do not dance before
the females when they wish to recommend themselves as husbands. Instead,
they pull at the strands of the web, whilst stationed at its
circumference, in a manner which has a distinct meaning for the female,
who sits in the centre, and who replies by other twitches. These may be
either of an encouraging or repellent nature, and it is only in the
former case that the lover ventures to approach. This, however, he must
do with extreme caution, and prepared at any moment to drop and hang
suspended by a thread should the object of his attentions, who greatly
exceeds him in size, change her mind or conceive some cause of
displeasure against him. Should he not be sufficiently quick on such
occasions, he is liable to be spun up between the long legs of his
lady-love as though he were a fly, and disposed of accordingly. This was
observed in 1798 by Raymond Maria de Termayer, who remarks upon it:
“Perhaps overpowering hunger compelled her to do it, but the act was
very ferocious.”

The most curious thing in these _webepathic_ courtships, as one may call
them, is that the female spider seems to know the particular jerk or
twitch of any strand of the web which is made by a male, and to
distinguish it, perfectly, from the vibrations set in motion by a fly or
other insect that enters it, for upon these occasions, though her back
may be turned towards her admirer, she does not trouble to look round,
whereas in the latter case she would not only do so, but come rushing
down to secure her victim—if she were hungry, perhaps it should be
added. On the other hand, as has been already mentioned, the male can
interpret the wishes of the female from the movement she imparts to the
thread, and regulates his conduct accordingly. Webepathy, therefore,
does not seem a name ill-chosen to describe this system of
intercommunication of ideas.

The spider mentioned above as devouring her lover was the common garden
or geometric one, as it is sometimes called, which in England is the
largest example of a web-spinner. In other parts of the world, however,
web-spinning spiders attain to a much larger size, and their webs, of
course, are in proportion. The largest, perhaps, are found in
Madagascar, and the gigantic fabrics which many of these weave are
curiously utilised by smaller spiders of a parasitic disposition, who
spin their own little webs between the thick strands of those of their
hosts. Here they live in perfect amity with the latter, in whose
presence they find a protection against the attacks of small birds—for
these, it would seem, stand in awe of these huge spiders, in whose toils
they are sometimes accidentally caught, and by whom they are then
devoured. So, at least, Vinson, the historian of the spiders of
Madagascar, would seem to imply, if he does not actually make the
statement, of which I will not be quite sure.[136] That the great
_Mygale_ of South America eats birds is now an established fact, Bates
having given an account of it in his well-known work, _The Naturalist on
the River Amazon_.[137] In this case also the birds—for there were two
of them—were caught in a web, but it was not a geometric one, in which
the spider sat, but a much denser and more closely woven fabric
stretched across a crevice, or irregularity, in the trunk of a tree, the
spider—which was of much larger size than the largest _Epeira_—keeping
watch behind it in the recess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: A BIRD-CATCHING SPIDER’S WEB.]

    This enormous Madagascar spider spins webs so strong that
      birds are caught and held in them. In one of the large
      meshes will be seen a small parasitic spider’s web for
      catching flies and other insects. The smaller spider is not
      only permitted to do this, but is protected by its host from
      the attacks of the smaller birds.

Other spiders—as doubtless the _Mygale_ if he can get them—will eat
lizards, as the following account by Mr. Frederick Pollock will show:
“Having procured from the Deserta Grande some fine specimens of this
large and handsome spider (_Lycosa_—a kind of tarantula) in the early
part of this year, and having provided suitable cages with glass lids
for them, I was anxious to ascertain how large an animal the largest
spider would take; and for this purpose I obtained some lizards about
three inches long, including the tail. Three of these lizards were
killed and devoured by one spider during the time I kept it. They were
eaten bones and head and claws and all, the only remnant of the feast
being a small ball about a quarter of an inch in diameter, which was
cast aside at the bottom of the cage.”[138] But why were not some larger
lizards tried, since there was no difficulty about three inches? Every
inch would have increased the fun—I mean have added to the scientific
interest. But perhaps there were none larger.

Mr. Pollock goes on to say that “the islands of Madeira, Porto Santo,
and Deserta Grande all lie within an area about fifty miles across. They
have each its own peculiar large _Lycosa_, no two being alike; and it is
a very remarkable fact that these _Lycosæ_ vary in size inversely with
the magnitude of the island on which they are found—Madeira, the largest
island, having the smallest _Lycosa_, and Deserta Grande, the smallest
island, having by far the largest spider. The mode of defence of all
these varieties of _Lycosæ_ is precisely the same. They elevate the
thorax, raise the first pair of legs high up, and opening wide asunder
their falces, strike at and seize any object, such as the end of a
pencil” (or the tail of a lizard) “in a most formidable manner.”[138]

There is another lizard-eating spider, or at least a spider that will
eat lizards when formally introduced to them, and that in a very
scientifically interesting manner, the lizard showing such a lively
sense of its situation, and the jaws of the spider working in a way
which is very curious. These jaws, it appears, are double, also
“cheliform,” “denticulate,” and several other things, from which I
gather that there are two pairs, each pair working something like the
claws of a crab, but with a sawing action, adapted to their toothed
surface. By an extremely beautiful adjustment, when the spider in
question seizes its prey, one pair of jaws holds on to it, whilst the
other saws into it, and then the pair which has been sawing, holds, and
the pair which has been holding, saws, and so on alternately, a
division, and yet, at the same time, a combination of labour.

                 “Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
                  But yet an union in partition.”

The efficacy of the arrangement was well tested by an Anglo-Indian
scientist upon a lizard three inches long, _exclusive_ this time of the
tail. “The spider sprang upon it, and made a seizure immediately behind
the shoulder. The poor lizard struggled violently at first, rolling over
and over in its agony, but the spider kept firm hold, and gradually
sawed away with its double jaws into the very entrails of its
victim.”[139] There was an interesting variation between this case and
the last, where, it will be remembered, the lizards were eaten “bones
and head and claws and all,” whereas here “the only parts _uneaten_ were
the jaws and part of the skin.” This lizard, however, was “at least five
inches long from nose to extremity of tail”; but then, again, the spider
must have been larger too, though clearly its meal was something in the
nature of a feat, since after it “it remained gorged and motionless for
about a fortnight, being much swollen and distended.”[139] There is no
mention of this in the other case, which would seem to imply that the
result was different. If so, we have here a fact of great interest—what
fact, scientifically elicited, is not?—but in order to establish it upon
a really firm basis, further experiments should be made, and, once more,
as the limit of size has evidently not yet been reached, I would
recommend a lizard of six inches long.

This spider, however, now I come to remember, is not really one, but a
_solpugid_, and a _solpugid_ is a creature so like a spider that it used
to be thought one some years ago, but now belongs, not only to a family,
but to an order of its own, which comes somewhere between the scorpions
and the true spiders. They are large creatures, and their bite is very
severe, though it does not appear to be poisonous. Some of the species
are nocturnal, as is the case with the one above mentioned, which was
christened _Galeodes vorax_ by its discoverer, Captain Hutton, if he
indeed discovered it. Captain Hutton, being a great entomologist—to
attain which title one has only to put pins through insects—used to lay
a sheet on the ground at night, and stand a lantern upon it. Numerous
insects were attracted to the light, and this brought _Galeodes_—who is
a great entomologist too, though without the pins—upon the _tapis_ or
_draps_.[139]

Often there would be fights between two rivals, and of these, or,
rather, of the general fighting, and one may also say yielding, habits
of the species, Captain Hutton gives the following somewhat curious
account. “They plant their true feet” (for these _Galeodes_ have a pair
which look exactly like feet, but are really their palpi) “firmly on the
ground, the body at the same time being elevated and the two pairs of
palpi held out in front, to ward off the attack. In this attitude they
advance and retire, according as either gains a slight advantage,
endeavouring to throw each other to one side, so as to expose some
vulnerable part or form an opening for attack; and when this is once
effected the fortunate wrestler instantly takes advantage of it, and
rushing in, seizes his adversary behind the thorax, and the combat is
ended, the vanquished victim yielding himself, without further struggle,
to his inevitable fate.” Similarly, “if, in their efforts to get away,
they are brought into contact, the one instantly seizes the other and
devours him, the victim making no struggle whatever; but if they meet
face to face they both enter into a wrestling match for life or death.”

This habit of yielding as soon as there is no more use in struggling
seems a very strange one, since it is opposed to the primary instinct of
self-preservation, and it is not easy to see how the species can benefit
by certain individuals dying in a passive manner, unless, indeed, by
refusing to do so they might injure the victor, who, by dying
afterwards, would add to the tribal mortality. If this be really the
explanation, we are reminded of Huber’s statement as to two queen bees,
when each has it in its power to sting the other, being seized with a
sort of horror, under the influence of which they separate, thus
avoiding the catastrophe of leaving the hive queenless.

Though, as we have seen, there are some spiders which eat birds, and
others which eat lizards, yet both these interesting things take place
abroad. Here, however, in England, it would seem that we have a spider
which eats worms, catching them at the end of a long woven bag which
descends into the earth, and into which the worm somehow manages to get.
How it does so, however, is not at all clear, since the bag, which is
sometimes a foot long, is described as having no opening at either end,
the spider living enclosed in it, apparently a permanent prisoner. Still
a sac like this would seem as difficult of entry for flies as for worms,
and the spider, which is three-quarters of an inch in length, and armed
with very large mandibles, or falces—to use the approved word—must, it
is plain, live on something. As a matter of fact, it was living on a
worm when found by Mr. Brown, who gives the following account of the
matter. “On drawing out one of the sacs,” he says, “I observed a worm at
the lower end, partially within the sac and partially outside, and it
was evident that the spider had been eating a considerable portion of
its anterior extremity.” One would have thought that a careful
examination of the way in which the worm had got into the sac would have
thrown light on the problem, but of this we hear nothing more.

When taken out of the ground the sac was limp and flaccid, but
afterwards the spider inflated it, and it was then seen to have some
minute valves—“openings,” that is to say, “protected or covered by a
little valve or door.” They were not, however, to be detected in every
nest—possibly on account of their very small size. That the object of
these valvular openings is to admit air seems obvious, for spiders
breathe through lungs and require a good supply of oxygen. It was now
concluded, both by Mr. Brown and Mr. Newman—a well-known
entomologist—that this particular spider lived on worms and resided
permanently in a long subterranean sac or bag, which it had the power of
inflating with air. A different view, however, was propounded by Mr.
Meade—an authority on spiders—who suggested that the worm had only got
into the sac by accident, and that the spider, like other subterranean
nest-makers, probably came out at night and fed abroad, returning to
rest at home during the daytime. To do this it would, indeed, have to
unweave one end of its sac—probably the upper one—and then do it up
again, but there was no reason, in Mr. Meade’s opinion, why it should
not act in this way. To me, however, it seems unlikely that the minute
valves, made with such care, should be destroyed in this manner and made
afresh every day; and moreover, when Mr. Brown looked again at the sac,
in order to test this theory, he could find no evidence of its having
been dealt with in this Penelopean manner. There were no traces of fresh
silk. The evidence, therefore, seems to be more in favour of _Attipus
sulzeri_—for that is its name—being a genuine worm-eating spider. If so,
it is worthy of all respect as a curiously aberrant form.[140]

These spiders are of a deep brown colour, with a very soft abdomen and a
generally half-baked appearance, but with hard, black, shining
mandibles. There was only a single individual—evidently the female—in
the sacs taken by Mr. Brown, but I myself was the finder of one such
sac—for I feel sure it must have been the same—in the New Forest, and in
this a pair were amicably settled, one being about twice the size of the
other. This, if I mistake not, was in May, but I also remember, or seem
to, that the bag was quite open at one end. Thus, then, stand the facts.
Upon them I think we are justified in believing that there is a
worm-eating spider in England, but of course it would be a very high
honour for any country to have such a creature, so that there is a
danger of letting one’s patriotic feelings run away with one.

In these sac-making spiders we see, perhaps, the ancestors of, or rather
travellers towards, those which crown a silk-lined perpendicular tunnel
with a skilfully made trap-door. The latter is furnished with a hinge,
and should it be discovered, the spider, seizing it from within,
endeavours with might and main to prevent its being raised. As is well
known, the upper surface of these trap-doors, or, as we may call them,
lids, are covered by the spider with such materials—leaves, grass, moss,
etc.—as surround the site of its nest, so that when shut down they are
indistinguishable from the general surface of the ground.

Another use to which the webs of spiders are put is that of a parachute,
on which the little creature—for small species alone may enjoy this
luxury—sails delicately through the air. This, however is not the
nearest approach made by any of the tribe to actual flight, though in
practice it almost surpasses that power, even as possessed by many
winged insects, who do indeed cleave the air, but cannot ride upon it in
a filmy chariot, twinkling in the rays of the sun. Still there is one
spider that, though it has not yet achieved wings, is in process of
developing them. This little semi-Ariel—but the subject will be best
done justice to in the glowing language of the Rev. O. P. Cambridge:
“Adult male, length rather above two lines. The abdomen is of an
elongated oval form, and rather flattened; its upper side is furnished
with an epidermis, which is continued, laterally, on either side to an
extent considerably exceeding the width of the abdomen, and of a
semi-oval or elliptical form; the outer portion of this epidermis, on
either side, is capable of being depressed and folded round the abdomen,
or elevated and expanded to its full width, after the manner of wings.
Mr. H. H. B. Bradley, of Sydney, New South Wales, to whom I am indebted
for examples of this exceedingly interesting and remarkable spider,
tells me that he has observed them elevating and depressing the flaps,
and also actually using them as wings or supporters to sustain the
length of their leaps. That this, as with an analogous appendage in the
flying squirrel, should be intended for such sustentation one could have
but little doubt, after examining it even in the preserved specimens.
The three examples were all found on one spot near Sydney, in the month
of October, running and jumping on low plants and flowers.”[141]

It is delightful to think of a little delicate spider-body like this,
rising gracefully from the petal of one flower, expanding its thin,
filmy fringes, and descending in a long slanting line through the air,
like a flying squirrel or a galeopithecus, onto the petal of another.
Even were its appearance no more than elegant, this would be a most
pleasing sight. But it is much more than this. Various hues meet in its
diminutive body, and so harmonious and pleasing is the general effect
produced by them that the first captor of so much loveliness was
enraptured as he gazed on his prize, whilst even Mr. Cambridge, with
only dried specimens to fire his imagination, yet cannot choose but
exclaim: “It is difficult to describe adequately the great beauty of the
colouring of this spider.”[141]

Spiders, then, either through gossamer or their own structural
modification, seem engaged in the conquest of the air. There remains but
the water, and this element also they have partly subdued. There are
raft-spiders and diving-bell spiders. The first, having woven a few
dried leaves, stalks, grasses, etc., launches out as courageously from
the shore as the first navigator, whose heart, according to Horace, was
thrice bound in brass, but who probably was timid and cautious. Our
spider, however, has no fears, nor need it to have any, since no sort of
capsizal can affect a structure which answers its purpose as well one
side up as another; whilst even if it were to sink—though that hardly
lies in its nature—there is always the water to run on. The raft, in
fact, is only like the nest or web ashore—a place to have a comfortable
meal in. The prey—some aquatic insect—is caught generally on the surface
of the stream, and the spider, after each successful raid, skims back
with her booty to the little self-guiding boat which it has temporarily
left. There, when no longer hungry, she sits and scuds about, careless
and pleasure-loving, like another little Phædria in her “flitt barck”
over the waters of the Idle Lake.[142]

“Thus,” says Büchner, “everywhere in nature are battle, craft, and
ingenuity, all following the merciless law of egoism, in order to
maintain their own lives and to destroy those of others.” In man,
indeed, there is some counterpoise to all this in the mind and _façon de
parler_; but the lower animals do not think so much, and, having no
proper language, cannot even talk altruistically.

Lastly, we have the water-spider, whose little spun nest, against the
submerged stem of some aquatic plant, is open at the bottom like a
diving-bell, and filled with air which its owner carries down from the
surface in successive bubbles, each one looking “like a globe of
quicksilver.” To collect them she swims on her back, and, in some
manner, entangles them amongst the numerous hairs with which her abdomen
is covered, where they cling safely all through the journey,

                     “Proud of that delicate lodgment.”

There may be other bubbles as pretty, perhaps, but few, by bursting, do
such good to those who have cherished them. In winter, it would seem,
the spider closes the entrance to the diving-bell, and sleeps, dry and

                              CHAPTER XXIV


    Aquatic insects—Lyonnet’s water-beetle—A floating cradle—Larva
      and pupa—An ingenious contrivance—Nothing useless—The
      imaginary philosopher—How the cradle is made—The mysterious
      “mast”—Later observation—The giant water-bug—An oppressed
      husband.

SPIDERS having brought us to the water, it may be as well, or even
better, in view of the title of this work, to say something about
water-insects. Of these, so long as the water be fresh, and not salt,
there are many, and the largest, perhaps, if he exceeds some of the
dragon-fly larvæ and the Giant Water-Bug of America, must be the Great
Water-Beetle—_Hydrophilus piceus_—which is larger even than the much
commoner one—_Dytiscus_—which everybody knows, and which is _the_
water-beetle to most people.

It is the fate of some animals to become associated for all time in our
minds with the name of some particular man, as, for instance, the bee is
with that of Huber, and the ephemera with that of Swammerdam. Again, the
fame of Lyonnet, though he was skilled in eight languages, and became
cypher secretary and confidential translator to the United Provinces of
Holland, is principally bound up with a certain caterpillar, viz. that
of the goat moth, of which creature, though only an amateur in such
matters, he made dissections and executed plates, which have never yet
been surpassed, and are supposed to be entirely unsurpassable. In a
lesser degree his memory is associated with this particular
water-beetle—the great one, into the heart of whose mystery he was the
first to pierce: “In the beginning of July,” he tells us, “I had noticed
in the ditches a kind of cocoon which I did not recognise. It was
whitish, of the size of the end of the finger, nearly spherical, but
rather oval and flattened. The surface, which looked like tow, was not
quite smooth. One of the two ends was flatter than the other, and
furnished with a raised rim. From the space within this rim projected a
sort of little tapering mast about as long as the cocoon.”[143]

These cocoons, when opened, were found to contain about a hundred eggs.
Lyonnet kept them in water till the eggs hatched. “The larvæ,” he says,
when this had taken place, “remained one day enclosed in the cocoon
before escaping. Then they made an oval aperture in the lower part of
the flattened end of the cocoon, and escaped through this into the
water.”[143] Here they fed upon snails, their manner of eating which is
thus described: “The larva seizes the snail with its mandibles, then
bends its body backwards and rests the snail upon the broad back, which
serves as a table (as with the larva of the grain-eating ant of Texas).
In this position, holding the snail in its legs, the larva breaks the
shell, and devours it.”[143]

When full-fed the larvæ left the water, and one of them was placed by
Lyonnet in a box full of moistened earth. This it entered, and, some
days afterwards, changed into a large white pupa or chrysalis, about
which there was one curious feature, viz. that “on each side of the
head”—or, as an entomologist would say nowadays, “on the fore part of
the prothorax—were three brown, strong hooks. Two others of the same
kind were found at the hinder end of the body.”[143] These hooks were
solid, so that they could contain no part of the perfect insect, and
Lyonnet points to them as good examples of _apparently_ useless
structures. Their office, indeed, he himself knows, but he does not
reveal it till the usual philosopher has been imagined who denies that
they can have any. Then, of course, comes the anticipated discomfiture
of this unwary person—so frequent in the eighteenth century—who,
unwarned by experience, has walked quietly into the trap. “In the damp
earth which the pupa requires the above-described hooks fulfil a
purpose, unexpected by us, but, at the same time, of great importance.
The skin of the pupa is very delicate. Lying on damp earth, it could
hardly escape injury, and the weight of the body might easily give it a
distorted shape. But (_Monsieur le Philosophe_) the pupa protects itself
from these dangers by assuming an unusual attitude. It extends itself
back downwards in a horizontal position, and supports the weight of its
body by the three sets of hooks, as upon a tripod. In this attitude,
though surrounded on all sides by moist earth, it keeps its body from
actual contact with any object until it has assumed its final shape.
Thus,” continues Lyonnet, turning full upon the stupefied philosopher,
“we see how necessary are those hooks, which at first sight appeared so
useless. To decide that this or that structure is superfluous because we
cannot guess its use is truly ridiculous in beings whose information is
so limited as ours.”[143] Applauding shouts (“_Mais certainement!_”
“_C’est vrai cela!_”) rend the air, and the imaginary philosopher goes
out in a state of painful confusion.

The above facts, first made known by Lyonnet, have been confirmed by
subsequent observers, such as Miger, and the pupa of another and much
smaller water-beetle is now known to support itself in the same manner,
or, rather, on the same principle, since the place of hooks at either
extremity is taken by spiny projections, with which the back is covered.

Lyonnet now turned his attention to the mature beetle, and especially to
the female, whom he was anxious to see make her cocoon. Having put a few
in a large wooden trough and supplied them with some floating weed, “I
had,” he says, “before long, the pleasure of seeing the female
_Hydrophilus_ betake herself to work under my eyes. I found, to my
surprise, that, like the spider, she had her spinneret at the hinder end
of the body. Two small brown prominences enclosed each a delicate
conical tube, from each of which a separate thread proceeded, and with
these the cocoon was woven in the following way. At first, lying
upside-down near the surface of the water, the beetle buried the hinder
part of her body, and the two hindermost pairs of legs, in the weed,
whilst with the first pair, which were free, she drew and pressed the
weed around the end of her body, moulding it to its shape. She then
began to weave what seemed the under half of her cocoon, but having
finished this part she turned over with it so that it became the upper
half, and then wove the real under one. The two curved surfaces were
then woven together, and in about an hour and a quarter the body of the
cocoon was finished. For about two hours after this the beetle remained
still, her back being uppermost. At first her body was buried in the
cocoon up to the thorax, but one could see that she was gradually
withdrawing it. During these two hours of apparent rest she laid her
eggs, not at hazard, but in regular order, side by side, the pointed
ends uppermost. This work accomplished, she closed the mouth of the
cocoon, and then began to spin the little mast, which gradually rose
above the surface of the water till it had attained the requisite
height, and the cocoon was then finished.”[143]

Lyonnet was unable to discover the use of the so-called mast, and it
remains a mystery to this day, so that the imaginary philosopher might
have a better chance here, were it not his _métier_ to be put to
confusion. It is hollow, and as the cocoon contains air, with which the
beetle supplies it—just as the water-spider does her diving-bell—Miger,
whose observations were made in 1807, some fifty years after those of
Lyonnet, supposed it might serve as the channel of entry. But, although
hollow, it has no orifice, but is closed at the end, and this does not
seem to accord with the above view. Mr. G. A. Laker, a modern observer,
does not think that the spike can serve as a balance to the cocoon,
since this is usually attached to some weed, or other supporting
substance. He, however, cut the spike off two of the cocoons, and the
eggs in both of these remained unhatched. Moreover, these cocoons
subsequently sank, whereas in their normal state they “are so
constructed that when floating loose the spike retains its proper
position, and even if the cocoon be held so that the spike is parallel
with the water and then suddenly released, it immediately rights
itself.”[144] The balance theory, therefore, certainly seems to have
something in its favour. Lyonnet’s own conjecture was that the mast, as
he calls it—a designation against which Miger protests—might merely
represent the waste silk which the beetle felt impelled to get rid of.
The time taken by the beetle in making the whole cocoon is about five
hours, whilst the mast, spike, or turned-up point, as Miger severely
calls it, takes it half an hour. It is curious that whereas Lyonnet’s
cocoons held “about a hundred” eggs, Mr. Laker gives the number as
“usually between fifty and sixty.”[144]

As space has its exigencies—and long may it continue to have—I will here
merely mention such names as _Gyrinus_, _Dytiscus_, _Hydrobius_,
_Donacia_, etc., “and let _them_ speak for me,” but having paid some
attention to the great water-beetle, silence in regard to the giant
water-bug would be hardly gracious, and might be ill taken. This
terrific creature is like a monstrous exaggeration of our own
water-scorpion, to which it bears a distorted, but real resemblance,
minus, however, the long ovipositor—the so-called tail behind. Its
appearance is not to be described. Like other bugs, and as are the
aphides and cicadas for less cruel purposes, it is armed with a long,
sharp-pointed beak, through which, having plunged it into the body of
its prey, on whose back it has previously leaped, it sucks the
life-juices, holding on, all the while, with its two curved, claw-like
front legs. Its strength is in accordance with its size, and both are
such that it finds no one in its own circle, so to speak, at all capable
of contending with it. “It is the facile master of the ponds and
estuaries of the tidal creeks and rivers of the Atlantic States,” says
Uhler. “Developing in the quiet pools, secreting itself beneath stones
or rubbish, it watches the approach of a _Pomotis_, mud-minnow, frog, or
other small-sized tenant of the water, when it darts with sudden
rapidity upon its unprepared victim, grasps the creature with its
strong, clasping fore-legs, plunges its deadly beak deep into the flesh,
and proceeds with the utmost coolness to leisurely suck its blood. A
copious supply of saliva is poured into the wound, and no doubt aids in
producing the paralysis which so speedily follows its puncture in small
creatures.”[145]

Another American water-bug of similar build, but much smaller size, has
the same general habits, to which it adds the more special one of
carrying about its eggs on its back, where, in time, they are hatched,
but do not, it would appear—though this seems somewhat out of harmony
with the practical spirit of nature—proceed at once to suck their
parent’s blood, an omission which, as it would be a most moving instance
of unselfish surrender on the part of the latter, is, perhaps, to be
regretted. Possibly the reason is that the eggs are not fixed upon the
right back, so that even were this _dénouement_ to take place, we should
not have an instance of maternal, but only of paternal affection. This,
for some reason, is not so effective as the other, and therefore Nature,
who, as we know, is a consummate artist, may not care to waste her
materials on an inferior situation.

Be this as it may, the fact that the domestic economy of these
water-bugs did not proceed, throughout, upon the lines that might have
been expected may first have led a German observer—Schmidt—to suspect
something unusual, in consequence of which misgiving he looked more
closely into the matter, and found—what had not before been
imagined—that the male and not the female was the egg-bearer. He was
not, however, able to determine how this arrangement was brought about,
or with what feelings the male received and bore his burden. This was
left for Miss Slater, who found that the females in her aquarium
insisted upon laying their eggs on the backs of the males, that the
latter objected to their doing so, which led to a struggle between the
two, often lasting for two or three hours, but ending invariably in the
victory of the female. The male has, then, to bow to necessity, but he
does not do so in a cheerful spirit, nor even without some further
efforts to escape his destiny. “That he chafes under the burden,” says
Miss Slater, “is unmistakable; in fact my suspicions as to the sex of
the egg-carrier were first aroused by watching one in an aquarium which
was trying to free itself from its load of eggs, an exhibition of a lack
of maternal interest not to be expected in a female carrying her own
eggs. Generally the _Zaithas_ are very active, darting about with great
rapidity, but an egg-bearer remains quietly clinging to a leaf, with the
end of the abdomen just out of the water. If attacked he meekly receives
the blows, seemingly preferring death (which, in several cases, was the
result) to the indignity of carrying and caring for the eggs.”[145] This
last, however, is not very explicit, so that, the whole account not
being to hand, I cannot say what precisely happened.

It is curious that the male should be so spiritless, after receiving the
eggs, for this would seem to nullify such advantages as the arrangement
might otherwise offer. The eggs must be laid somewhere, and might be
supposed safer on the back of the male than elsewhere—in which fact,
perhaps, we may see the origin of the instinct. But if the male, sinking
under his burden, is able neither to defend himself nor it, this
advantage seems nullified.

Estuaries and tidal creeks, which, as we have seen, are included in the
habitat of these water-bugs—at least, of the giant one—bring us
gradually to the sea. That there are marine insects we know, but they do
not appear to extend beyond the tidal beach, on the sands of which they
expatiate, when the sea is out, and burrow into them on its return. All
are small, and still smaller is the amount said about them, even in such
works as are precisely those where all that is known on the subject
ought to be stated—systematic works of natural history, for instance,
which take “_Arthropoda_ (Insects, etc.)” in their due order, but do not
so much as tell you whether marine ones exist or not. Yet the date of
such works is after 1895. For these reasons, and another which has been
once or twice before alluded to, I have but one remark to make about
marine insects, and I will make that in the next chapter.

                              CHAPTER XXV


    One remark—Phosphorescent insects—Glow-worms and
      fire-flies—Fiery courtship—A beetle with three
      lamps—Travelling by beetle-light—The great lantern-fly
      controversy—Is it luminous?—Madame Merian’s
      statement—Contradictory evidence—A Chinese edict—Suggested
      use of the “lantern”—Confirmation required—Luminous
      centipedes.

NO marine insect—this is the remark—is phosphorescent—that is to say, as
far as I know, which is a very saving clause indeed. This seems curious,
because, as everyone knows, other sea-dwelling creatures are, producing
most wonderful and beautiful effects, and, moreover, the luminous
property is active in many terrestrial insects. Of these the glow-worm
is a familiar and, though, perhaps, the humblest, a very beautiful
example. At any rate, there are insects of the glow-worm family whose
fires are far less “ineffectual,” or, to speak more truly, far outglow
those of our own species. What, for instance, can be more gorgeous than
the green or orange lights—for they differ in colour according to the
sexes—with which the nights and the rich vegetation of the West Indies
are brilliantly, yet softly, lit up? Nothing, surely, if it be not the
name of the creature producing such splendour, which is _Pygolampis
xanthophotis_[146]—not one syllable less.

Whether it is the male or the female that gives out the green or the
orange light, I do not know, nor in my opinion do various monographists
in various encyclopædias and text-books, though they make no such
avowal, but content themselves with not saying. However, it is not a
matter of importance except to the insect producing it, in whose breast
the one or the other colour arouses very different sensations—rivalry or
love. For there is no doubt now that these lovely illuminations, as well
as those of our own glow-worm and of every other light-bearing creature,
have relation to the needs and wants of their producers, to whose
æsthetic sense, and not to ours, they are intended to appeal. That they
appeal also to our own is a mere irrelevant side-issue, not considered,
so to speak, by the force under whose pressure these beauties were
called forth, and not of the smallest consequence. It was not always
thought so, and were the pride of man reachable by such considerations
it might humiliate us to reflect that displays, which in real beauty
immeasurably surpass our clumsy illuminations and fireworks, are made
nightly, not for our eyes, but for those of a beetle.


on which one of his editors of the nineteenth remarks: “This is still
the generally received notion, but the fact is that both sexes of the
glow-worm are phosphorescent, not only in the perfect insect, but also
in the larva and even pupa state.”[147] But this does not affect White’s
statement, which is the simple fact, as well as “the generally received
notion,” and, moreover, though our own male glow-worm is phosphorescent,
it is not so brilliantly so as the female. Indeed, in the ninth edition
of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_—which is later than this editorial
note—it is stated not to be so at all, so that even if White believed
this—which is not very clear—he has been supported by learned authority
for a very long time.

In other species the male is the more brilliant, or the sexes do not
differ greatly in this respect, each one lighting its “amorous fire” in
the degree that nature allows it to—as no doubt our own male does too.
Of this fact, which, in the light of Darwinism, might have been boldly
assumed, there is no longer any doubt after Professor Emery’s
interesting observations[149] on the Italian species _Luciola Italica_.
These were made in the meadows around Bologna, where, having caught some
females, the Professor imprisoned them in glass tubes and laid them down
amidst the grass. In this situation, though smell as an attractive agent
was excluded, males would come flashing to the glass, and, on the other
hand, as soon as the lamp of any of these became visible, the female
would kindle her own, if it had previously been unlighted. Arrived on
the spot, the male would dash madly about the unapproachable female, who
continued to light her lamp at him till another, and then others,
arrived, when it is to be supposed that her favours were distributed. In
the end there would sometimes be a dozen fiery rivals glowing and
flashing round the tube. But though the female shot out her attractive
beams with evident intent to please, it does not appear that she was the
seeker in the business, since we hear only of males flying to the
imprisoned females, and not of females pursuing these males. To such
modest merit, therefore, as a nice distinction between different ways of
attaining the same end may entitle her, the female glow-worm also is
entitled.

The light of the two sexes in the Italian glow-worm is described by
Professor Emery as being the same in colour and intensity, but differing
in some other respects. The flashes of the male, for instance, are more
quickly recurrent, whilst those of the female gleam out at longer
intervals, but last for a longer time. They are, also, more tremulous,
as well as more restricted, though what is meant by this last
expression, since the brightness is said to be equal, is not quite
apparent. Possibly it may imply that the light proceeds from a lesser
area of the body, but, if so, this should be clearly stated, even in a
_résumé_. I can find no reference to such a fact, if it be one, in the
text-books.

From the above it is evident that the glow-worm’s fires are anything but
“uneffectual” from the point of view of the insect, but Shakespeare was
no doubt thinking of something very different—their paling, namely,
before the light of dawn. According to Gilbert White, however, they
should have been out long ago—the glow-worm being too wise to afford
opportunities of comparison in this respect. Thus subtly does the
naturalist of Selborne impugn the accuracy of the Bard of Avon: “By
observing,” he says, “two glow-worms which were brought from the field
to the bank in the garden, it appeared to us that these little creatures
put out their lamps between eleven and twelve, and shine no more for the
rest of the night.”[149] The intention here, though cleverly disguised,
is not sufficiently so to escape detection. It was possibly seen through
by the late Charles and Mary Cowden Clarke, who in one of the million or
so notes to their edition of Shakespeare, say, without distinct
reference to the passage in question:—“_Uneffectual._ There is double
signification included in this word; it means the glow-worm’s light,
which shines without giving heat, and which no longer shows when morning
appears.”[150] Thus whilst not committing themselves to White’s opinion
they provide a safe refuge for their author, in case it should prove in
time to be correct; according to the sound principle contained in a
Russian proverb which says, “Had he known where he was going to fall, he
would have laid down straw.”

In tropical countries fire-flies take the place of glow-worms with us,
and though the light which these give out is not so soft and poetic as
the lovely green or golden green one of the latter, yet it is more
effectively beautiful, owing to the way in which it wanders through the
night, appearing and disappearing in successive brilliant flashes. For
here the beetle that carries the lamp is a flier, and flashes it about
at pleasure through the air, having the power, it would seem, either of
showing or concealing its light. The effect of a number of these points
of brilliancy, gleaming out, now here, now there, on the soft night air
of the tropics, is inexpressibly beautiful, as though, in a smaller
firmament, innumerable miniature stars had ceaseless birth and death.

Women, who like to emphasise their own beauty, or the want of it, by
placing themselves in juxtaposition with every lovely thing in nature,
and care not if a thousand deaths go to help one smile or glance, have
not forgotten the fire-flies. They put them in their hair, or wire them
onto their dresses, threading them together, sometimes, in long bands,
which they wind about their fair—or otherwise—persons; they do this,
more especially, when going out to parties, fancy-dress balls, or other
social entertainments. The advantages are obvious, for the homeliest
features may be thus lighted up, and the dullest woman become brilliant.
No wonder that in some South American cities—Vera Cruz for example—these
fire-fly beetles form quite an important article of trade, all for
toilette purposes.[151] The natives catch them by waving sticks with
burning coals tied to their ends through the air, by the light of which
they are attracted, and so come within reach of a long-handled butterfly
net. When caught, they are put into a box covered with a little netting
of wire, and there kept till wanted. They are fed upon sugar-cane, and
twice a day must be bathed in tepid water.[151]

What is done with the poor beetles after they have contributed to the
night’s amusement we are never told—whether those that have been all
wired together are unwired and let go, or pulled off in two or more
pieces to save trouble, as seems more likely. It is likelier still
perhaps, in the houses of the rich, that the whole thing is flung aside,
and the poor living lamps left to struggle till they die—unprovided with
sugar-cane. But such details are not thought worth mentioning. The
charming effect is the one thing dwelt upon, and charming it may very
well be, though to gain it through a mass of even insect discomfort is,
to my mind, a contemptible thing. Fancy fifty or a hundred
uncomfortable, writhing, struggling things on the dress that a lady is
dancing in, every one of which, if let go, would make a wandering star
in the air more really worth looking at than the whole ball-room
together! By substituting flowers for women, however, effects far more
beautiful are gained through less reprehensible means. The
fire-beetles—why should they be called flies?—are in this case confined
in small globes of delicate glass, set amidst clusters of flowers, or
flowering shrubs, and thus they softly illuminate the garden. Give them
some sugar-cane whilst the party is in progress, and let them go next
morning, and they will have had very little to complain of—a strange
experience for any lower creature that gets into the clutches of the
highest one.

The most wonderful of all the fire-beetles is the large one of near two
inches long—quite, or more, if we count the antennæ—that inhabits
Mexico, where in ancient times it was used as a lantern by the Aztecs in
their night-journeys, as it still is by their modern descendants. It is
wonderful, not by reason of its size merely, or, in any special degree,
of the light it emits—though this is brilliant in proportion to it—but
because it carries three separate lamps: two above, situated on either
side of the thorax, and one on the under side, just in front of the
abdomen. Thus, as it turns or varies in its flight, one flash of the
most intense brilliancy follows another, like the revolving light of a
lighthouse. The colour of the light is described as a rich
green—richest, however, or at least brightest, on the under
surface.[151] The beauty and dazzling effect of this upon a dark night
can be imagined, and is thus described by Dr. Kidder: “Before retracing
my steps I stood for a few moments looking down into the Cimmerian
blackness of the gulf before me; and while thus gazing a luminous mass
seemed to start from the very centre. I watched it as it floated up,
revealing in its slow flight the long leaves of the palm _Euterpe
edulis_, and the minuter foliage of other trees. It came directly
towards me, lighting up the gloom around with its three luminosities,
which I could distinctly see.”[151] There is something wonderfully
poetical in the thought of winged beings like this pursuing each other
through the night, by the light of these glorious flashes—the “light of
their own loveliness,” it may well be called, since it is, indeed, their
beauty. If seems curious and a waste that where there is the greatest
capacity of poetic imagination we should find the least, or almost the
least, realisation of it in habit and structure.

We know from Oviedo that the Mexican Indians, when they travelled at
night, were accustomed to fasten these great refulgent beetles on their
hands and feet, and thus pass flaming through the country. They danced,
too, by their light, and even wove or painted by it. Why, therefore,
could not lamps of great power, as well as beauty, be evolved from such
insects by bringing the selective agency of man to bear upon them? The
phosphorescent principle in living nature has not perhaps been made the
most of by us. Was more made of it by the Aztecs? and did they turn
their attention to the systematic rearing of these living lamps?—for,
from hearing so little about them one would not think that these insects
were so useful now, as, from the above account and what other
contemporary Spanish writers tell us, it would seem that they were, at
the time of this old and cruelly destroyed civilisation.

Holder, in his work on phosphorescent animals, either quotes or refers
to Prescott as saying that “when the Spaniards visited the country”—that
is, Mexico, “the air was filled with the _cucujo_, a species of large
beetle which emits an intense phosphoric light from its body strong
enough to enable one to read by. These wandering flies, seen in the
darkness of the night, were converted by the excited imagination of the
besieged into an army of matchlocks.” Surely, from such a foundation,
something as superior to it as are our cultivated fruits, or domestic
breeds, to the wild stocks from which they sprung, might in no long time
be produced, since it is not to be supposed but that some individuals of
the _Pyrophorus_ give a stronger light than others. The above passage,
by the way, if it be from the _Conquest of Mexico_, as one might suppose
it to be, is most carefully concealed in the index, which, however, it
might very well be, and yet exist, as I know from much teasing
experience. As to the matchlocks, would to Heaven the old Mexicans, as
well as the Peruvians, had had them, or, still better, 11-inch
Howitzers. I might then have something more to say about these wonderful
beetles. All I can add now is that the light appears to be used by the
insect as a guide to its own movements, since when the celebrated Dr.
Dubois covered one of the side ones with wax, this caused the individual
so treated to walk in a curve, and when “both spots were covered it soon
stopped, and then moved in an uncertain manner, carefully feeling the
ground with its antennæ.”[151] But I do not know if “both” here means
all three of the lamps, or only the two upper ones.

If there be any luminous insect that eclipses the _Pyrophorus_ it must
be the great lantern-fly—also of South America—provided only that the
great lantern-fly _is_ luminous. That is a most essential point, and it
does not appear yet to have been satisfactorily made out. The principal
evidence on the affirmative side is that of Madame Merian, who was right
about the _Mygale_—the great bird-killing spider—and who here speaks as
an actual eye-witness. Her account is as follows: “The Indians,” she
says, “once brought me, before I knew that they shone at night, a large
number of these lantern-flies, which I shut up in a large wooden box. In
the night they made such a noise that I awoke in a fright, and ordered a
light to be brought, not knowing from whence the noise proceeded. As
soon as we found that it came from the box we opened it, but were still
more alarmed, and let it fall to the ground in a fright at seeing a
flame of fire come out of it; and as many animals as came out, so many
flames of fire appeared. When we found this to be the case we recovered
from our fright, and again collected the insects, highly admiring their
splendid appearance.”[151]

Here, then, is a definite statement, from which all possibility of
mistake seems excluded, if, as I suppose is the case, there is no doubt
as to the specific identity of the insect which was the subject of it,
and which is thus described by Mr. Holder in the work already mentioned:
“The _Fulgora lanternaria_ of South America,” he tells us, “is nearly
three and a half inches long from tip of head to extremity of tail (i.e.
abdomen), and almost five and a half inches broad with its wings
expanded.” Truly a goodly insect, of right portly dimensions, and if it
be not really luminous—upon occasions, at any rate, for it certainly is
not so generally—it is so much the greater pity. But to continue: “The
body is of a lengthened oval shape, while the head is distinguished by a
singular prolongation, which sometimes equals the rest of the body in
size.” This is a most remarkable appendage, if it may be called so,
hollow and with a blown-up, inflated sort of look. It does, indeed, to
some extent resemble a Chinese lantern, and seems made to be lighted up.
The colour, too, suggests this, since it is striped longitudinally with
red and yellow, presenting quite a gala appearance. Accordingly, it is
said to be here that the luminous property of this strange insect
exists. This is its lantern, and, by reason of it, it has received its
name of lantern-fly.

And yet, since that night when Madame Merian had her interesting
experience, we meet with no one, apparently, who can unequivocally say
that he has seen the Great Lantern-Fly with its lantern alight. On the
other hand, we have some second-hand statements which have almost the
value of first, such as that of M. Westmael, who “assures us that a
friend of his observed the luminosity”;[151] whilst “John C. Branner,
PH.D., states that when in South America he was often informed that it
was luminous, but never could find anyone who had personally seen the
light.”[151] The curious thing is that there are other lantern-flies
belonging to other parts of the world, and in regard to them too we have
the same doubt and discrepancy, the same assurances and general belief,
the same categorical denials. Thus a distinguished authority on the
subject of phosphorescence— Dr. Phipson—in referring to the smaller
Chinese species, _Fulgora candelaria_—the candle-fly—says: “It is from
these appendages, the sides of which are transparent, that the
phosphoric light appears.” And again: “It is said also that the trunk of
a tree covered with numerous individuals of _Fulgora candelaria_, some
in movement, others in repose, presents a very grand spectacle,
impossible to describe, but which may be witnessed sometimes in
China.”[151] It would seem, too, that there exists a Chinese edict which
forbids young women to keep these candle-flies; and if this is not with
the idea of preventing their use as signals, or of checking vanity, it
is difficult to see what the object of such an enactment can be.

Lastly, we are told by Packard, in his _Guide to Insects_, that “Mr.
Caleb Cooke, of Salem, who resided several years in Zanzibar, Africa,
told me that the lantern-fly is said by the native to be luminous. They
state that the long snout lights up in the night, and in describing it
say its head is like a lamp (_keetchwa kand-tah_).”

All this evidence appears to me to point in one way, and one way only—I
mean, of course, in its entirety, since otherwise it points in two ways.
But even if it is possible that in one country alone an insect—well
known and conspicuous—can have got the reputation of being luminous
without really being so, at least occasionally, this can hardly have
come about in regard to the same, or some allied insect, in three or
four countries. Added to this we have Madame Merian’s direct evidence,
but, on the other hand, it is perfectly clear that these insects are not
always, or even generally, luminous. The conclusion, then, seems
irresistible that they occasionally are so, that, for some reason or
other, the phosphorescent principle is active in them only at certain
times or seasons. Why this should be so we do not know, but there is
nothing inconceivable in it; and some other animals—for instance,
centipedes—would seem to be luminous at some times and not at others.

The so-called lantern or snout being a very remarkable organ, for which
some use must be assumed, the likelihood of its sometimes becoming a
lamp would be increased considerably, if, so far as we knew, it
performed no other office. This was how the case stood till lately; but
in 1899 there was the Skeat Expedition for scientific purposes to the
Malay Archipelago, and on its return Mr. Nelson Annandale propounded a
theory in regard to the more ordinary use, at least, of the organ in
question, which was based on his own observation. His account is as
follows: “The curious anterior prolongation of the head in many genera
of the _Fulgoridæ_ has long puzzled entomologists. At Biserat, in Jalor,
I was fortunate enough to observe the real use of this peculiar
structural modification. On the morning of May 30th I noticed a specimen
of _Hotinus spinola_ seated on the trunk of a Durian tree in the
village, and incautiously attempted to catch it in my hand. The insect
remained almost still, merely drawing in its legs towards its body and
pressing the claws firmly against the bark, until I had almost touched
it. Then it lowered its head with very great rapidity, flew up into the
air without spreading its wings, and alighted on the roof of a house six
feet behind a tree, and considerably higher than its position on the
trunk had been. At the time I did not notice anything peculiar in the
way in which this _Fulgorid_ jumped, for there are many large species of
the same family which, without being provided with long noses, can leap
for a considerable distance by means of their legs only; but as I was
examining my specimen (a dead one) I was struck by an indentation or
crease that ran across the central region of the nose at right angles to
its main axis. Then I discovered that at this point, and at this point
only, it was flexible, and that if the tip of the nose and the dorsal
surface of the abdomen were pressed together between the finger and
thumb, and then suddenly released, the insect would not fall straight to
the ground, but would be propelled for some distance through the air
before doing so, just as would be the case if a piece of whalebone were
treated in like manner.”[152]

Mr. Annandale then goes on to show, or to suggest, that the
_Fulgorid_—as he calls it—by pressing its snout—or lantern—against the
tree-trunk, and at the same time pushing itself off from it with its
legs, “would fly into the air at a tangent,” and he continues: “I have
no doubt that this is substantially what occurs in the case of
_Hotinus_; but in the living insect the action is far too rapid for the
eye to discriminate its details, and dead specimens cannot be made to
leap in this way because it is impossible to force the legs to perform
their part of the action.”[152] Such, then, is the theory, but as other
members of the family jump in much the same way, to all appearance,
without any such apparatus, and since the bending of the head, at such a
moment, might be correlated with the movements requisite to produce such
a leap as this, it certainly wants confirmation.

Some of the finest displays of luminosity have been observed in
centipedes, which although not insects, may be counted such for the
purpose of this volume. Thus M. Audouin, noticing one night a light
proceeding from one of his chicory-fields, “ordered his man to turn up
the earth, when the scene that followed is described as truly
magnificent. The soil appeared as if it had been sprinkled with molten
gold, the display being intensified if the insects were trodden upon or
rubbed. In the latter case streaks of light appeared, as if a bit of
phosphorus had been placed upon the hands, the light being distinctly
visible for twenty seconds.”[153]
Mr. Brodhurst, again, referring to another species—_Geophilus
electricus_—about an inch and a half in length, and in the daytime
inconspicuous enough, says: “The light looked like moonlight, so bright
was it through the trees. It was a dark night, warm and sultry. Taking a
letter, I could read it. It resembled an electric light, and proceeded
from two centipedes and their trails. The light illuminated the entire
body of the animal, and seemed to increase its diameter three times. It
flashed along both sides of the creature in sections, there being about
six, from head to tail, between which the light played, moving, as it
were, perpetually in two streams. The trail extended one and a half feet
from each centipede over the grass and gravel walk, and it had the
appearance of illuminated mucus. On securing one of the creatures for
examination, I found on touching it the light was instantly
extinguished.”[153] 

The display is, therefore, voluntary, nor could Mr.
Brodhurst ever get his centipedes to shine in captivity.
    Scorpions and suicide—The act proved—Intention
      probable—Conflicting evidence—Scorpions and
      cockroaches—Concentrating backwards—Economy of
      poison—Decorous feeding.

THE assertion that scorpions are occasionally luminous—if indeed it has
ever been seriously made—does not appear to have received confirmation.
Of fire, indeed, these creatures have a horror, but that probably
relates to its property—heat—to which they are extremely sensitive. The
popular belief is, that, if surrounded by fire, a scorpion will
deliberately sting itself to death. Of the fact, or, at least, of the
fact of the self-inflicted sting, there can be little doubt, but in
regard to the motive there is room for difference of opinion. Mr. Pocock
says, truly enough, that it is _à priori_ improbable that the scorpion
has any intention of killing itself.[154] But what, then, is its
intention in stinging itself, supposing that it deliberately does so?
Nor must it be forgotten that the idea of death—of destruction—must be
indissolubly associated in the scorpion’s mind with the use of its
sting, since it uses it with that purpose only, and that is the result
which constantly attends its use. Is it, then, really so improbable that
it stings itself with the same intention as that with which it stings
other creatures?—or, rather, with what other possible intention can it
do so, assuming the act to be a voluntary one?
Nor would it be necessary to prove the intention that the sting, thus
delivered, should be fatal in its effects, and, in regard to this, Mr.
Bourne has satisfied himself by experiments with some Indian scorpions
that a self-inflicted wound, or even wounds inflicted by individuals of
the same species on one another, have no effect. On the other hand, he
found that a moderately high temperature was fatal to his scorpions, and
so concludes that this has been the real cause of death in all such
cases as we are here considering.[154]

The above theory, however, hardly accords with the experience of Mr. W.
G. Bidie, also of India, and that very part of it where Mr. Bourne’s
experiments were made—viz. Madras. Writing to _Nature_, he says: “One
morning a servant brought me a large specimen of this scorpion (the
common black one of Southern India), which, having stayed out too long
in its nocturnal rambles, had apparently got bewildered at daybreak and
been unable to find its way home. To keep it safe the creature was at
once put into a glazed entomological case. Having a few leisure minutes
in the course of the forenoon, I thought I would see how my prisoner was
getting on, and to have a better view of it, the case was placed in a
window in the rays of the hot sun. The light and heat seemed to irritate
it very much, and this recalled to my mind a story which I had read
somewhere that a scorpion on being surrounded with fire had committed
suicide. I hesitated about subjecting my pet to such a terrible ordeal,
but taking a common botanical lens, I focussed the rays of the sun on
its back” (so that Apollo may have flayed Marsyas as a mild
alternative). “The moment this was done it began to run hurriedly about
the case, hissing and spitting in a very fierce way. This experiment was
repeated some four or five times with like results, but on trying it
once again the scorpion turned up its tail and plunged the sting, quick
as lightning, into its own back. The infliction of the wound was
followed by a sudden escape of fluid, and a friend, standing by me,
called out, ‘See! it has stung itself: it is dead.’ And sure enough in
less than half a minute life was quite extinct.”

This seems plain enough. The scorpion had not died of the heat, up to
the moment at which it stung itself—an act which would require some
vital energy. It did sting itself, and in less than half a minute
afterwards it was dead. Moreover, as the experiments with the lens were
intermittent, there seems no more reason why the last one should have
been fatal than the other four or five. It is, perhaps, possible to
imagine that the scorpion was almost dead before, that the last heating
caused it to expire, and that in the moment of doing so it stung itself
by involuntary muscular action. There is nothing, however, in the
narrative to suggest this, but quite the contrary.
Supposing the sting to have been a voluntary act, what could the
scorpion have intended except to injure itself? Had it ever in its life
used its sting with any other purpose than that of doing injury? Mr.
Bidie adds: “I have written this brief note to show (1) that animals may
commit suicide; (2) that the poison of certain animals may be
destructive to themselves.”[155]

Writing several years later, also to _Nature_, Dr. Allen Thomson,
F.R.S., gives the following account, not, indeed, of his own experience,
but that of an eye-witness in whom he feels full confidence. He says:
“While residing, many years ago, during the summer months, at the baths
of Sulla, in Italy, in a somewhat damp locality, my informant, together
with the rest of the family, was much annoyed by the frequent intrusion
of small black scorpions into the house, and their being secreted among
the bedclothes, in shoes, and other articles of dress. It thus became
necessary to be constantly on the watch for these troublesome creatures,
and to take means for their removal and destruction. Having been
informed by the natives of the place that the scorpion would destroy
itself if exposed to a sudden light, my informant and her friends soon
became adepts in catching the scorpions and disposing of them in the
manner suggested. This consisted in confining the animal under an
inverted drinking-glass or tumbler, below which a card was inserted, and
then, waiting till dark, suddenly bringing the light of a candle near to
the glass in which the animal was confined. No sooner was this done than
the scorpion invariably showed signs of great excitement, running round
and round the interior of the tumbler with reckless velocity for a
number of times. This state having lasted for a minute or more, the
animal suddenly became quiet, and, turning its tail on the hinder part
of its body over its back, brought its recurved sting down upon the
middle of the head, and, piercing it forcibly, in a few seconds became
quite motionless, and, in fact, quite dead. This observation was
repeated very frequently.”[156]

Here, again, it is difficult to see how a mistake in observation can
have occurred, and admitting the facts to be true, they go far beyond
Mr. Bourne’s theory to account for these phenomena, which, however, has
been adopted by Mr. Pocock, as the result of his own experiments. In the
first place, it is not here the heat—unless by association of ideas—but
the actual sight of the flame that terrifies the scorpion, and death,
apparently, is inflicted as the result of that. Again, there can be no
doubt as to the self-inflicted stinging, and from the manner of it, as
well as its invariability, it seems to have been deliberate. Whether
death was the result of it or not, we have the act, and the act, if a
voluntary one, must have implied a destructive intention. It hardly
seems possible, however, that the light of a candle, outside a tumbler,
though held near it, can in so short a time have made the interior so
hot as to kill the scorpion, whilst, on the other hand, the poison from
the creature’s sting must have pierced its brain, and a few seconds
afterwards it was dead.

If, then, we decide to disbelieve in the story of scorpions committing
suicide when unable to escape from fire, we must explain away these two
accounts, which we can do by supposing the narrators to be either
dishonest or stupid. There is no other way that I can see, so if neither
of these do, we ought to believe the story. However, there is plenty of
evidence which points in the opposite direction, and the advantage of
this is that we can take our choice.
Scorpions are interesting animals to keep in captivity, and their habits
under these conditions have been carefully studied by Mr. Pocock.[154]
When supplied with sand they dig pits in it, in which they lie during
the greater part of the day. The second and third pairs of legs are used
for this purpose, the scorpion raising itself upon the other two pairs,
as well as, to a certain extent, upon the claws and the end of the tail.
In this position it kicks the sand backwards from under it, and then
when the excavation is sufficiently deep, sweeps away the accumulated
heap, with its tail, so that the edge of its lurking-place is on a level
with the surrounding surface. It can thus, as it lies there, obtain an
uninterrupted view, which the better enables it to receive with proper
attention any creature of the requisite size and quality that approaches
its portals. Such creatures are principally insects, spiders,
centipedes, wood-lice, and the like—but here we may remember one little
spider that imitates a scorpion, and may therefore approach with
impunity, at least if the disparity in size be not too great, for whilst
some scorpions are quite small, others attain a length of eight or nine
inches, with a bulk more than in proportion to their length.
In captivity, and, no doubt, under nature too, when they happen to come
across them, scorpions will eat cockroaches, but a cockroach is not
altogether a defenceless creature, and sometimes a large one will give
battle, and even with success. The weapons upon which, in these cases,
it relies are its powerful hind legs armed, as they are, with spines
which project backwards. Backwards accordingly it advances upon the
scorpion, and increasing its pace suddenly, when at the requisite
distance salutes the astonished enemy with a shower of kicks. So
unexpected is this mode of assault that it is sometimes effective, even
against so redoubtable an opponent as a scorpion, whilst a tarantula
spider has been known to fly, panic-stricken, before or rather behind a
large cockroach. But such efforts, however heroic, can have only a
transient success, where the conditions are so unequal. Jaws and sting
must prevail against soft bodies armed only with spiny legs. “_Alla
stoccata_ carries it away.” Generally the poor cockroach is
seized—sometimes, in the first instance, by the antennæ—as it comes
inadvertently too near to the scorpion, or even trespasses upon its
back. At once the tail is bent above it, and the fatal sting enters its
body. Paralysis ensues, and would no doubt be quickly followed by death,
even were the scorpion, thereupon, to retire. As it is, however, it is
difficult to say whether the victim dies more of the sting or of being
eaten.

From the latter process, at any rate, there is no recovery, as may be
seen in the case of smaller cockroaches, upon whom the scorpion, from
motives of economy, does not always waste its poison. It merely, when
thus provident, holds the contemptible creature in its claws, whilst
bringing to bear upon it its two pairs of chelæ or real jaws, which act
upon the same principle as those of _Galeodes vorax_, if the reader
remember. It feeds in a leisurely manner, the impatience of the
cockroach not affecting it in the least. Two hours for a good-sized
one—a _pièce de résistance_—is not considered too long by the scorpion.
Scorpions, it appears, use their stings in a very careful, deliberate
manner. It is not a mere random thrust with them, lunged in anywhere,
just as the body of an insect happens to come. On the contrary, they
feel about this body, most anxiously, with their tail, till they have
found a soft spot in it, and then introduce their sting in a careful
manner. In fact, they sting an insect in much the way that Isaak Walton
impaled a frog upon the hook—“tenderly as if they loved him”—and for the
same class of reason, viz. to make a workmanlike job of it, and not
break their stings against the harder parts of its body, for the point
of this weapon is delicate and might get chipped against the hard shards
of a beetle, or other such resisting surface.
For the same prudent reason the tail is carried aloft, over the
scorpion’s back, when it walks, so that the whole organ, but especially
the point of it, which is curled round again underneath, is preserved
from contact with the outer world. The sting, or rather the sides of the
poison vesicle just above it, are clothed with hairs, which are, no
doubt, delicately tactile, and the same may be said of the tail and
various other parts of the body. Touch, indeed, is the principal sense
which conveys impressions to the soul of the scorpion. Sight is
defective, and hearing does not seem to exist.

No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth century
that this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligences
greater than man’s and yet as mortal as his own; that as men busied
themselves about their various concerns they were scrutinised and
studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might
scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of
water. With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe
about their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empire
over matter. It is possible that the infusoria under the microscope do
the same. No one gave a thought to the older worlds of space as sources
of human danger, or thought of them only to dismiss the idea of life
upon them as impossible or improbable. It is curious to recall some of
the mental habits of those departed days. At most terrestrial men
fancied there might be other men upon Mars, perhaps inferior to
themselves and ready to welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet across the
gulf of space, minds that are to our minds as ours are to those of the
beasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic,
regarded this earth with envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew their
plans against us. And early in the twentieth century came the great
disillusionment.

The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the reader, revolves about the
sun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles, and the light and heat it
receives from the sun is barely half of that received by this world. It
must be, if the nebular hypothesis has any truth, older than our world;
and long before this earth ceased to be molten, life upon its surface
must have begun its course. The fact that it is scarcely one seventh of
the volume of the earth must have accelerated its cooling to the
temperature at which life could begin. It has air and water and all
that is necessary for the support of animated existence.

Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his vanity, that no writer, up to
the very end of the nineteenth century, expressed any idea that
intelligent life might have developed there far, or indeed at all,
beyond its earthly level. Nor was it generally understood that since
Mars is older than our earth, with scarcely a quarter of the
superficial area and remoter from the sun, it necessarily follows that
it is not only more distant from time’s beginning but nearer its end.

The secular cooling that must someday overtake our planet has already
gone far indeed with our neighbour. Its physical condition is still
largely a mystery, but we know now that even in its equatorial region
the midday temperature barely approaches that of our coldest winter.
Its air is much more attenuated than ours, its oceans have shrunk until
they cover but a third of its surface, and as its slow seasons change
huge snowcaps gather and melt about either pole and periodically
inundate its temperate zones. That last stage of exhaustion, which to
us is still incredibly remote, has become a present-day problem for the
inhabitants of Mars. The immediate pressure of necessity has brightened
their intellects, enlarged their powers, and hardened their hearts. And
looking across space with instruments, and intelligences such as we
have scarcely dreamed of, they see, at its nearest distance only
35,000,000 of miles sunward of them, a morning star of hope, our own
warmer planet, green with vegetation and grey with water, with a cloudy
atmosphere eloquent of fertility, with glimpses through its drifting
cloud wisps of broad stretches of populous country and narrow,
navy-crowded seas.

And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to them at
least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us. The
intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant
struggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the belief
of the minds upon Mars. Their world is far gone in its cooling and this
world is still crowded with life, but crowded only with what they
regard as inferior animals. To carry warfare sunward is, indeed, their
only escape from the destruction that, generation after generation,
creeps upon them.

And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what ruthless
and utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only upon
animals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its inferior
races. The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness, were entirely
swept out of existence in a war of extermination waged by European
immigrants, in the space of fifty years. Are we such apostles of mercy
as to complain if the Martians warred in the same spirit?

The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazing
subtlety—their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of
ours—and to have carried out their preparations with a well-nigh
perfect unanimity. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have seen
the gathering trouble far back in the nineteenth century. Men like
Schiaparelli watched the red planet—it is odd, by-the-bye, that for
countless centuries Mars has been the star of war—but failed to
interpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped so
well. All that time the Martians must have been getting ready.

During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen on the illuminated
part of the disk, first at the Lick Observatory, then by Perrotin of
Nice, and then by other observers. English readers heard of it first in
the issue of _Nature_ dated August 2. I am inclined to think that this
blaze may have been the casting of the huge gun, in the vast pit sunk
into their planet, from which their shots were fired at us. Peculiar
markings, as yet unexplained, were seen near the site of that outbreak
during the next two oppositions.

The storm burst upon us six years ago now. As Mars approached
opposition, Lavelle of Java set the wires of the astronomical exchange
palpitating with the amazing intelligence of a huge outbreak of
incandescent gas upon the planet. It had occurred towards midnight of
the twelfth; and the spectroscope, to which he had at once resorted,
indicated a mass of flaming gas, chiefly hydrogen, moving with an
enormous velocity towards this earth. This jet of fire had become
invisible about a quarter past twelve. He compared it to a colossal
puff of flame suddenly and violently squirted out of the planet, “as
flaming gases rushed out of a gun.”

A singularly appropriate phrase it proved. Yet the next day there was
nothing of this in the papers except a little note in the _Daily
Telegraph_, and the world went in ignorance of one of the gravest
dangers that ever threatened the human race. I might not have heard of
the eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the well-known astronomer, at
Ottershaw. He was immensely excited at the news, and in the excess of
his feelings invited me up to take a turn with him that night in a
scrutiny of the red planet.

In spite of all that has happened since, I still remember that vigil
very distinctly: the black and silent observatory, the shadowed lantern
throwing a feeble glow upon the floor in the corner, the steady ticking
of the clockwork of the telescope, the little slit in the roof—an
oblong profundity with the stardust streaked across it. Ogilvy moved
about, invisible but audible. Looking through the telescope, one saw a
circle of deep blue and the little round planet swimming in the field.
It seemed such a little thing, so bright and small and still, faintly
marked with transverse stripes, and slightly flattened from the perfect
round. But so little it was, so silvery warm—a pin’s head of light! It
was as if it quivered, but really this was the telescope vibrating with
the activity of the clockwork that kept the planet in view.

As I watched, the planet seemed to grow larger and smaller and to
advance and recede, but that was simply that my eye was tired. Forty
millions of miles it was from us—more than forty millions of miles of
void. Few people realise the immensity of vacancy in which the dust of
the material universe swims.

Near it in the field, I remember, were three faint points of light,
three telescopic stars infinitely remote, and all around it was the
unfathomable darkness of empty space. You know how that blackness looks
on a frosty starlight night. In a telescope it seems far profounder.
And invisible to me because it was so remote and small, flying swiftly
and steadily towards me across that incredible distance, drawing nearer
every minute by so many thousands of miles, came the Thing they were
sending us, the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamity
and death to the earth. I never dreamed of it then as I watched; no one
on earth dreamed of that unerring missile.

That night, too, there was another jetting out of gas from the distant
planet. I saw it. A reddish flash at the edge, the slightest projection
of the outline just as the chronometer struck midnight; and at that I
told Ogilvy and he took my place. The night was warm and I was thirsty,
and I went stretching my legs clumsily and feeling my way in the
darkness, to the little table where the siphon stood, while Ogilvy
exclaimed at the streamer of gas that came out towards us.

That night another invisible missile started on its way to the earth
from Mars, just a second or so under twenty-four hours after the first
one. I remember how I sat on the table there in the blackness, with
patches of green and crimson swimming before my eyes. I wished I had a
light to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of the minute gleam I
had seen and all that it would presently bring me. Ogilvy watched till
one, and then gave it up; and we lit the lantern and walked over to his
house. Down below in the darkness were Ottershaw and Chertsey and all
their hundreds of people, sleeping in peace.

He was full of speculation that night about the condition of Mars, and
scoffed at the vulgar idea of its having inhabitants who were
signalling us. His idea was that meteorites might be falling in a heavy
shower upon the planet, or that a huge volcanic explosion was in
progress. He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that organic
evolution had taken the same direction in the two adjacent planets.

“The chances against anything manlike on Mars are a million to one,” he
said.

Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the night after
about midnight, and again the night after; and so for ten nights, a
flame each night. Why the shots ceased after the tenth no one on earth
has attempted to explain. It may be the gases of the firing caused the
Martians inconvenience. Dense clouds of smoke or dust, visible through
a powerful telescope on earth as little grey, fluctuating patches,
spread through the clearness of the planet’s atmosphere and obscured
its more familiar features.

Even the daily papers woke up to the disturbances at last, and popular
notes appeared here, there, and everywhere concerning the volcanoes
upon Mars. The seriocomic periodical _Punch_, I remember, made a happy
use of it in the political cartoon. And, all unsuspected, those
missiles the Martians had fired at us drew earthward, rushing now at a
pace of many miles a second through the empty gulf of space, hour by
hour and day by day, nearer and nearer. It seems to me now almost
incredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate hanging over us, men
could go about their petty concerns as they did. I remember how
jubilant Markham was at securing a new photograph of the planet for the
illustrated paper he edited in those days. People in these latter times
scarcely realise the abundance and enterprise of our nineteenth-century
papers. For my own part, I was much occupied in learning to ride the
bicycle, and busy upon a series of papers discussing the probable
developments of moral ideas as civilisation progressed.

One night (the first missile then could scarcely have been 10,000,000
miles away) I went for a walk with my wife. It was starlight and I
explained the Signs of the Zodiac to her, and pointed out Mars, a
bright dot of light creeping zenithward, towards which so many
telescopes were pointed. It was a warm night. Coming home, a party of
excursionists from Chertsey or Isleworth passed us singing and playing
music. There were lights in the upper windows of the houses as the
people went to bed. From the railway station in the distance came the
sound of shunting trains, ringing and rumbling, softened almost into
melody by the distance. My wife pointed out to me the brightness of the
red, green, and yellow signal lights hanging in a framework against the
sky. It seemed so safe and tranquil.




II.
THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first falling star. It was seen early in the
morning, rushing over Winchester eastward, a line of flame high in the
atmosphere. Hundreds must have seen it, and taken it for an ordinary
falling star. Albin described it as leaving a greenish streak behind it
that glowed for some seconds. Denning, our greatest authority on
meteorites, stated that the height of its first appearance was about
ninety or one hundred miles. It seemed to him that it fell to earth
about one hundred miles east of him.

I was at home at that hour and writing in my study; and although my
French windows face towards Ottershaw and the blind was up (for I loved
in those days to look up at the night sky), I saw nothing of it. Yet
this strangest of all things that ever came to earth from outer space
must have fallen while I was sitting there, visible to me had I only
looked up as it passed. Some of those who saw its flight say it
travelled with a hissing sound. I myself heard nothing of that. Many
people in Berkshire, Surrey, and Middlesex must have seen the fall of
it, and, at most, have thought that another meteorite had descended. No
one seems to have troubled to look for the fallen mass that night.

But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had seen the shooting
star and who was persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on the common
between Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with the idea of
finding it. Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far from the
sand-pits. An enormous hole had been made by the impact of the
projectile, and the sand and gravel had been flung violently in every
direction over the heath, forming heaps visible a mile and a half away.
The heather was on fire eastward, and a thin blue smoke rose against
the dawn.

The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in sand, amidst the
scattered splinters of a fir tree it had shivered to fragments in its
descent. The uncovered part had the appearance of a huge cylinder,
caked over and its outline softened by a thick scaly dun-coloured
incrustation. It had a diameter of about thirty yards. He approached
the mass, surprised at the size and more so at the shape, since most
meteorites are rounded more or less completely. It was, however, still
so hot from its flight through the air as to forbid his near approach.
A stirring noise within its cylinder he ascribed to the unequal cooling
of its surface; for at that time it had not occurred to him that it
might be hollow.

He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the Thing had made for
itself, staring at its strange appearance, astonished chiefly at its
unusual shape and colour, and dimly perceiving even then some evidence
of design in its arrival. The early morning was wonderfully still, and
the sun, just clearing the pine trees towards Weybridge, was already
warm. He did not remember hearing any birds that morning, there was
certainly no breeze stirring, and the only sounds were the faint
movements from within the cindery cylinder. He was all alone on the
common.

Then suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey clinker,
the ashy incrustation that covered the meteorite, was falling off the
circular edge of the end. It was dropping off in flakes and raining
down upon the sand. A large piece suddenly came off and fell with a
sharp noise that brought his heart into his mouth.

For a minute he scarcely realised what this meant, and, although the
heat was excessive, he clambered down into the pit close to the bulk to
see the Thing more clearly. He fancied even then that the cooling of
the body might account for this, but what disturbed that idea was the
fact that the ash was falling only from the end of the cylinder.

And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of the
cylinder was rotating on its body. It was such a gradual movement that
he discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had been
near him five minutes ago was now at the other side of the
circumference. Even then he scarcely understood what this indicated,
until he heard a muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerk
forward an inch or so. Then the thing came upon him in a flash. The
cylinder was artificial—hollow—with an end that screwed out! Something
within the cylinder was unscrewing the top!

“Good heavens!” said Ogilvy. “There’s a man in it—men in it! Half
roasted to death! Trying to escape!”

At once, with a quick mental leap, he linked the Thing with the flash
upon Mars.

The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that he
forgot the heat and went forward to the cylinder to help turn. But
luckily the dull radiation arrested him before he could burn his hands
on the still-glowing metal. At that he stood irresolute for a moment,
then turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off running wildly into
Woking. The time then must have been somewhere about six o’clock. He
met a waggoner and tried to make him understand, but the tale he told
and his appearance were so wild—his hat had fallen off in the pit—that
the man simply drove on. He was equally unsuccessful with the potman
who was just unlocking the doors of the public-house by Horsell Bridge.
The fellow thought he was a lunatic at large and made an unsuccessful
attempt to shut him into the taproom. That sobered him a little; and
when he saw Henderson, the London journalist, in his garden, he called
over the palings and made himself understood.

“Henderson,” he called, “you saw that shooting star last night?”

“Well?” said Henderson.

“It’s out on Horsell Common now.”

“Good Lord!” said Henderson. “Fallen meteorite! That’s good.”

“But it’s something more than a meteorite. It’s a cylinder—an
artificial cylinder, man! And there’s something inside.”

Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand.

“What’s that?” he said. He was deaf in one ear.

Ogilvy told him all that he had seen. Henderson was a minute or so
taking it in. Then he dropped his spade, snatched up his jacket, and
came out into the road. The two men hurried back at once to the common,
and found the cylinder still lying in the same position. But now the
sounds inside had ceased, and a thin circle of bright metal showed
between the top and the body of the cylinder. Air was either entering
or escaping at the rim with a thin, sizzling sound.

They listened, rapped on the scaly burnt metal with a stick, and,
meeting with no response, they both concluded the man or men inside
must be insensible or dead.

Of course the two were quite unable to do anything. They shouted
consolation and promises, and went off back to the town again to get
help. One can imagine them, covered with sand, excited and disordered,
running up the little street in the bright sunlight just as the shop
folks were taking down their shutters and people were opening their
bedroom windows. Henderson went into the railway station at once, in
order to telegraph the news to London. The newspaper articles had
prepared men’s minds for the reception of the idea.

By eight o’clock a number of boys and unemployed men had already
started for the common to see the “dead men from Mars.” That was the
form the story took. I heard of it first from my newspaper boy about a
quarter to nine when I went out to get my _Daily Chronicle_. I was
naturally startled, and lost no time in going out and across the
Ottershaw bridge to the sand-pits.




III.
ON HORSELL COMMON.


I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people surrounding the huge
hole in which the cylinder lay. I have already described the appearance
of that colossal bulk, embedded in the ground. The turf and gravel
about it seemed charred as if by a sudden explosion. No doubt its
impact had caused a flash of fire. Henderson and Ogilvy were not there.
I think they perceived that nothing was to be done for the present, and
had gone away to breakfast at Henderson’s house.

There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the Pit, with their
feet dangling, and amusing themselves—until I stopped them—by throwing
stones at the giant mass. After I had spoken to them about it, they
began playing at “touch” in and out of the group of bystanders.

Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing gardener I employed
sometimes, a girl carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his little
boy, and two or three loafers and golf caddies who were accustomed to
hang about the railway station. There was very little talking. Few of
the common people in England had anything but the vaguest astronomical
ideas in those days. Most of them were staring quietly at the big table
like end of the cylinder, which was still as Ogilvy and Henderson had
left it. I fancy the popular expectation of a heap of charred corpses
was disappointed at this inanimate bulk. Some went away while I was
there, and other people came. I clambered into the pit and fancied I
heard a faint movement under my feet. The top had certainly ceased to
rotate.

It was only when I got thus close to it that the strangeness of this
object was at all evident to me. At the first glance it was really no
more exciting than an overturned carriage or a tree blown across the
road. Not so much so, indeed. It looked like a rusty gas float. It
required a certain amount of scientific education to perceive that the
grey scale of the Thing was no common oxide, that the yellowish-white
metal that gleamed in the crack between the lid and the cylinder had an
unfamiliar hue. “Extra-terrestrial” had no meaning for most of the
onlookers.

At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the Thing had come
from the planet Mars, but I judged it improbable that it contained any
living creature. I thought the unscrewing might be automatic. In spite
of Ogilvy, I still believed that there were men in Mars. My mind ran
fancifully on the possibilities of its containing manuscript, on the
difficulties in translation that might arise, whether we should find
coins and models in it, and so forth. Yet it was a little too large for
assurance on this idea. I felt an impatience to see it opened. About
eleven, as nothing seemed happening, I walked back, full of such
thought, to my home in Maybury. But I found it difficult to get to work
upon my abstract investigations.

In the afternoon the appearance of the common had altered very much.
The early editions of the evening papers had startled London with
enormous headlines:

“A MESSAGE RECEIVED FROM MARS.”


“REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING,”


and so forth. In addition, Ogilvy’s wire to the Astronomical Exchange
had roused every observatory in the three kingdoms.

There were half a dozen flys or more from the Woking station standing
in the road by the sand-pits, a basket-chaise from Chobham, and a
rather lordly carriage. Besides that, there was quite a heap of
bicycles. In addition, a large number of people must have walked, in
spite of the heat of the day, from Woking and Chertsey, so that there
was altogether quite a considerable crowd—one or two gaily dressed
ladies among the others.

It was glaringly hot, not a cloud in the sky nor a breath of wind, and
the only shadow was that of the few scattered pine trees. The burning
heather had been extinguished, but the level ground towards Ottershaw
was blackened as far as one could see, and still giving off vertical
streamers of smoke. An enterprising sweet-stuff dealer in the Chobham
Road had sent up his son with a barrow-load of green apples and ginger
beer.

Going to the edge of the pit, I found it occupied by a group of about
half a dozen men—Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall, fair-haired man that I
afterwards learned was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with several
workmen wielding spades and pickaxes. Stent was giving directions in a
clear, high-pitched voice. He was standing on the cylinder, which was
now evidently much cooler; his face was crimson and streaming with
perspiration, and something seemed to have irritated him.

A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered, though its lower
end was still embedded. As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the staring
crowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down, and asked me
if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord of the manor.

The growing crowd, he said, was becoming a serious impediment to their
excavations, especially the boys. They wanted a light railing put up,
and help to keep the people back. He told me that a faint stirring was
occasionally still audible within the case, but that the workmen had
failed to unscrew the top, as it afforded no grip to them. The case
appeared to be enormously thick, and it was possible that the faint
sounds we heard represented a noisy tumult in the interior.

I was very glad to do as he asked, and so become one of the privileged
spectators within the contemplated enclosure. I failed to find Lord
Hilton at his house, but I was told he was expected from London by the
six o’clock train from Waterloo; and as it was then about a quarter
past five, I went home, had some tea, and walked up to the station to
waylay him.




IV.
THE CYLINDER OPENS.


When I returned to the common the sun was setting. Scattered groups
were hurrying from the direction of Woking, and one or two persons were
returning. The crowd about the pit had increased, and stood out black
against the lemon yellow of the sky—a couple of hundred people,
perhaps. There were raised voices, and some sort of struggle appeared
to be going on about the pit. Strange imaginings passed through my
mind. As I drew nearer I heard Stent’s voice:

“Keep back! Keep back!”

A boy came running towards me.

“It’s a-movin’,” he said to me as he passed; “a-screwin’ and a-screwin’
out. I don’t like it. I’m a-goin’ ’ome, I am.”

I went on to the crowd. There were really, I should think, two or three
hundred people elbowing and jostling one another, the one or two ladies
there being by no means the least active.

“He’s fallen in the pit!” cried some one.

“Keep back!” said several.

The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my way through. Every one
seemed greatly excited. I heard a peculiar humming sound from the pit.

“I say!” said Ogilvy; “help keep these idiots back. We don’t know
what’s in the confounded thing, you know!”

I saw a young man, a shop assistant in Woking I believe he was,
standing on the cylinder and trying to scramble out of the hole again.
The crowd had pushed him in.

The end of the cylinder was being screwed out from within. Nearly two
feet of shining screw projected. Somebody blundered against me, and I
narrowly missed being pitched onto the top of the screw. I turned, and
as I did so the screw must have come out, for the lid of the cylinder
fell upon the gravel with a ringing concussion. I stuck my elbow into
the person behind me, and turned my head towards the Thing again. For a
moment that circular cavity seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset in
my eyes.

I think everyone expected to see a man emerge—possibly something a
little unlike us terrestrial men, but in all essentials a man. I know I
did. But, looking, I presently saw something stirring within the
shadow: greyish billowy movements, one above another, and then two
luminous disks—like eyes. Then something resembling a little grey
snake, about the thickness of a walking stick, coiled up out of the
writhing middle, and wriggled in the air towards me—and then another.

A sudden chill came over me. There was a loud shriek from a woman
behind. I half turned, keeping my eyes fixed upon the cylinder still,
from which other tentacles were now projecting, and began pushing my
way back from the edge of the pit. I saw astonishment giving place to
horror on the faces of the people about me. I heard inarticulate
exclamations on all sides. There was a general movement backwards. I
saw the shopman struggling still on the edge of the pit. I found myself
alone, and saw the people on the other side of the pit running off,
Stent among them. I looked again at the cylinder, and ungovernable
terror gripped me. I stood petrified and staring.

A big greyish rounded bulk, the size, perhaps, of a bear, was rising
slowly and painfully out of the cylinder. As it bulged up and caught
the light, it glistened like wet leather.

Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding me steadfastly. The mass
that framed them, the head of the thing, was rounded, and had, one
might say, a face. There was a mouth under the eyes, the lipless brim
of which quivered and panted, and dropped saliva. The whole creature
heaved and pulsated convulsively. A lank tentacular appendage gripped
the edge of the cylinder, another swayed in the air.

Those who have never seen a living Martian can scarcely imagine the
strange horror of its appearance. The peculiar V-shaped mouth with its
pointed upper lip, the absence of brow ridges, the absence of a chin
beneath the wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of this mouth,
the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the tumultuous breathing of the lungs
in a strange atmosphere, the evident heaviness and painfulness of
movement due to the greater gravitational energy of the earth—above
all, the extraordinary intensity of the immense eyes—were at once
vital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous. There was something
fungoid in the oily brown skin, something in the clumsy deliberation of
the tedious movements unspeakably nasty. Even at this first encounter,
this first glimpse, I was overcome with disgust and dread.

Suddenly the monster vanished. It had toppled over the brim of the
cylinder and fallen into the pit, with a thud like the fall of a great
mass of leather. I heard it give a peculiar thick cry, and forthwith
another of these creatures appeared darkly in the deep shadow of the
aperture.

I turned and, running madly, made for the first group of trees, perhaps
a hundred yards away; but I ran slantingly and stumbling, for I could
not avert my face from these things.

There, among some young pine trees and furze bushes, I stopped,
panting, and waited further developments. The common round the
sand-pits was dotted with people, standing like myself in a
half-fascinated terror, staring at these creatures, or rather at the
heaped gravel at the edge of the pit in which they lay. And then, with
a renewed horror, I saw a round, black object bobbing up and down on
the edge of the pit. It was the head of the shopman who had fallen in,
but showing as a little black object against the hot western sun. Now
he got his shoulder and knee up, and again he seemed to slip back until
only his head was visible. Suddenly he vanished, and I could have
fancied a faint shriek had reached me. I had a momentary impulse to go
back and help him that my fears overruled.

Everything was then quite invisible, hidden by the deep pit and the
heap of sand that the fall of the cylinder had made. Anyone coming
along the road from Chobham or Woking would have been amazed at the
sight—a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or more
standing in a great irregular circle, in ditches, behind bushes, behind
gates and hedges, saying little to one another and that in short,
excited shouts, and staring, staring hard at a few heaps of sand. The
barrow of ginger beer stood, a queer derelict, black against the
burning sky, and in the sand-pits was a row of deserted vehicles with
their horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the ground.




V.
THE HEAT-RAY.


After the glimpse I had had of the Martians emerging from the cylinder
in which they had come to the earth from their planet, a kind of
fascination paralysed my actions. I remained standing knee-deep in the
heather, staring at the mound that hid them. I was a battleground of
fear and curiosity.

I did not dare to go back towards the pit, but I felt a passionate
longing to peer into it. I began walking, therefore, in a big curve,
seeking some point of vantage and continually looking at the sand-heaps
that hid these new-comers to our earth. Once a leash of thin black
whips, like the arms of an octopus, flashed across the sunset and was
immediately withdrawn, and afterwards a thin rod rose up, joint by
joint, bearing at its apex a circular disk that spun with a wobbling
motion. What could be going on there?

Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two groups—one a little
crowd towards Woking, the other a knot of people in the direction of
Chobham. Evidently they shared my mental conflict. There were few near
me. One man I approached—he was, I perceived, a neighbour of mine,
though I did not know his name—and accosted. But it was scarcely a time
for articulate conversation.

“What ugly _brutes_!” he said. “Good God! What ugly brutes!” He
repeated this over and over again.

“Did you see a man in the pit?” I said; but he made no answer to that.
We became silent, and stood watching for a time side by side, deriving,
I fancy, a certain comfort in one another’s company. Then I shifted my
position to a little knoll that gave me the advantage of a yard or more
of elevation and when I looked for him presently he was walking towards
Woking.

The sunset faded to twilight before anything further happened. The
crowd far away on the left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I heard
now a faint murmur from it. The little knot of people towards Chobham
dispersed. There was scarcely an intimation of movement from the pit.

It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and I
suppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore confidence.
At any rate, as the dusk came on a slow, intermittent movement upon the
sand-pits began, a movement that seemed to gather force as the
stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained unbroken. Vertical
black figures in twos and threes would advance, stop, watch, and
advance again, spreading out as they did so in a thin irregular
crescent that promised to enclose the pit in its attenuated horns. I,
too, on my side began to move towards the pit.

Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the sand-pits,
and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels. I saw a lad
trundling off the barrow of apples. And then, within thirty yards of
the pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little
black knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag.

This was the Deputation. There had been a hasty consultation, and since
the Martians were evidently, in spite of their repulsive forms,
intelligent creatures, it had been resolved to show them, by
approaching them with signals, that we too were intelligent.

Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to the left.
It was too far for me to recognise anyone there, but afterwards I
learned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with others in this
attempt at communication. This little group had in its advance dragged
inward, so to speak, the circumference of the now almost complete
circle of people, and a number of dim black figures followed it at
discreet distances.

Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of luminous
greenish smoke came out of the pit in three distinct puffs, which drove
up, one after the other, straight into the still air.

This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better word for it) was so
bright that the deep blue sky overhead and the hazy stretches of brown
common towards Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed to darken
abruptly as these puffs arose, and to remain the darker after their
dispersal. At the same time a faint hissing sound became audible.

Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with the white flag at
its apex, arrested by these phenomena, a little knot of small vertical
black shapes upon the black ground. As the green smoke arose, their
faces flashed out pallid green, and faded again as it vanished. Then
slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud, droning
noise. Slowly a humped shape rose out of the pit, and the ghost of a
beam of light seemed to flicker out from it.

Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare leaping from one to
another, sprang from the scattered group of men. It was as if some
invisible jet impinged upon them and flashed into white flame. It was
as if each man were suddenly and momentarily turned to fire.

Then, by the light of their own destruction, I saw them staggering and
falling, and their supporters turning to run.

I stood staring, not as yet realising that this was death leaping from
man to man in that little distant crowd. All I felt was that it was
something very strange. An almost noiseless and blinding flash of
light, and a man fell headlong and lay still; and as the unseen shaft
of heat passed over them, pine trees burst into fire, and every dry
furze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames. And far away
towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and wooden
buildings suddenly set alight.

It was sweeping round swiftly and steadily, this flaming death, this
invisible, inevitable sword of heat. I perceived it coming towards me
by the flashing bushes it touched, and was too astounded and stupefied
to stir. I heard the crackle of fire in the sand-pits and the sudden
squeal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled. Then it was as if an
invisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn through the heather
between me and the Martians, and all along a curving line beyond the
sand-pits the dark ground smoked and crackled. Something fell with a
crash far away to the left where the road from Woking station opens out
on the common. Forth-with the hissing and humming ceased, and the
black, dome-like object sank slowly out of sight into the pit.

All this had happened with such swiftness that I had stood motionless,
dumbfounded and dazzled by the flashes of light. Had that death swept
through a full circle, it must inevitably have slain me in my surprise.
But it passed and spared me, and left the night about me suddenly dark
and unfamiliar.

The undulating common seemed now dark almost to blackness, except where
its roadways lay grey and pale under the deep blue sky of the early
night. It was dark, and suddenly void of men. Overhead the stars were
mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale, bright, almost
greenish blue. The tops of the pine trees and the roofs of Horsell came
out sharp and black against the western afterglow. The Martians and
their appliances were altogether invisible, save for that thin mast
upon which their restless mirror wobbled. Patches of bush and isolated
trees here and there smoked and glowed still, and the houses towards
Woking station were sending up spires of flame into the stillness of
the evening air.

Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment. The
little group of black specks with the flag of white had been swept out
of existence, and the stillness of the evening, so it seemed to me, had
scarcely been broken.

It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless, unprotected,
and alone. Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from without,
came—fear.

With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the heather.

The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror not only of
the Martians, but of the dusk and stillness all about me. Such an
extraordinary effect in unmanning me it had that I ran weeping silently
as a child might do. Once I had turned, I did not dare to look back.

I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I was being played
with, that presently, when I was upon the very verge of safety, this
mysterious death—as swift as the passage of light—would leap after me
from the pit about the cylinder, and strike me down.




VI.
THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.


It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay men so
swiftly and so silently. Many think that in some way they are able to
generate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute
non-conductivity. This intense heat they project in a parallel beam
against any object they choose, by means of a polished parabolic mirror
of unknown composition, much as the parabolic mirror of a lighthouse
projects a beam of light. But no one has absolutely proved these
details. However it is done, it is certain that a beam of heat is the
essence of the matter. Heat, and invisible, instead of visible, light.
Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its touch, lead runs like
water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass, and when it falls upon
water, incontinently that explodes into steam.

That night nearly forty people lay under the starlight about the pit,
charred and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the common
from Horsell to Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.

The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, and
Ottershaw about the same time. In Woking the shops had closed when the
tragedy happened, and a number of people, shop people and so forth,
attracted by the stories they had heard, were walking over the Horsell
Bridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at last upon
the common. You may imagine the young people brushed up after the
labours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would make any
novelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivial
flirtation. You may figure to yourself the hum of voices along the road
in the gloaming. . . .

As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the cylinder had
opened, though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a bicycle to the
post office with a special wire to an evening paper.

As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the open, they found
little knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the spinning
mirror over the sand-pits, and the newcomers were, no doubt, soon
infected by the excitement of the occasion.

By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may have
been a crowd of three hundred people or more at this place, besides
those who had left the road to approach the Martians nearer. There were
three policemen too, one of whom was mounted, doing their best, under
instructions from Stent, to keep the people back and deter them from
approaching the cylinder. There was some booing from those more
thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always an occasion
for noise and horse-play.

Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, had
telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martians
emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to protect these strange
creatures from violence. After that they returned to lead that
ill-fated advance. The description of their death, as it was seen by
the crowd, tallies very closely with my own impressions: the three
puffs of green smoke, the deep humming note, and the flashes of flame.

But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine. Only the
fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of the
Heat-Ray saved them. Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror been a
few yards higher, none could have lived to tell the tale. They saw the
flashes and the men falling and an invisible hand, as it were, lit the
bushes as it hurried towards them through the twilight. Then, with a
whistling note that rose above the droning of the pit, the beam swung
close over their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees that line
the road, and splitting the bricks, smashing the windows, firing the
window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a portion of the
gable of the house nearest the corner.

In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, the
panic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for some
moments. Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into the road, and
single leaves like puffs of flame. Hats and dresses caught fire. Then
came a crying from the common. There were shrieks and shouts, and
suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the confusion with
his hands clasped over his head, screaming.

“They’re coming!” a woman shrieked, and incontinently everyone was
turning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way to
Woking again. They must have bolted as blindly as a flock of sheep.
Where the road grows narrow and black between the high banks the crowd
jammed, and a desperate struggle occurred. All that crowd did not
escape; three persons at least, two women and a little boy, were
crushed and trampled there, and left to die amid the terror and the
darkness.




VII.
HOW I REACHED HOME.


For my own part, I remember nothing of my flight except the stress of
blundering against trees and stumbling through the heather. All about
me gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians; that pitiless sword
of heat seemed whirling to and fro, flourishing overhead before it
descended and smote me out of life. I came into the road between the
crossroads and Horsell, and ran along this to the crossroads.

At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence of my
emotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside. That
was near the bridge that crosses the canal by the gasworks. I fell and
lay still.

I must have remained there some time.

I sat up, strangely perplexed. For a moment, perhaps, I could not
clearly understand how I came there. My terror had fallen from me like
a garment. My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away from its
fastener. A few minutes before, there had only been three real things
before me—the immensity of the night and space and nature, my own
feebleness and anguish, and the near approach of death. Now it was as
if something turned over, and the point of view altered abruptly. There
was no sensible transition from one state of mind to the other. I was
immediately the self of every day again—a decent, ordinary citizen. The
silent common, the impulse of my flight, the starting flames, were as
if they had been in a dream. I asked myself had these latter things
indeed happened? I could not credit it.

I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep incline of the bridge. My
mind was blank wonder. My muscles and nerves seemed drained of their
strength. I dare say I staggered drunkenly. A head rose over the arch,
and the figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared. Beside him ran
a little boy. He passed me, wishing me good night. I was minded to
speak to him, but did not. I answered his greeting with a meaningless
mumble and went on over the bridge.

Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white, firelit
smoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying
south—clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone. A dim group of
people talked in the gate of one of the houses in the pretty little row
of gables that was called Oriental Terrace. It was all so real and so
familiar. And that behind me! It was frantic, fantastic! Such things, I
told myself, could not be.

Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods. I do not know how far my
experience is common. At times I suffer from the strangest sense of
detachment from myself and the world about me; I seem to watch it all
from the outside, from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of time, out
of space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all. This feeling was
very strong upon me that night. Here was another side to my dream.

But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this serenity and the
swift death flying yonder, not two miles away. There was a noise of
business from the gasworks, and the electric lamps were all alight. I
stopped at the group of people.

“What news from the common?” said I.

There were two men and a woman at the gate.

“Eh?” said one of the men, turning.

“What news from the common?” I said.

“Ain’t yer just _been_ there?” asked the men.

“People seem fair silly about the common,” said the woman over the
gate. “What’s it all abart?”

“Haven’t you heard of the men from Mars?” said I; “the creatures from
Mars?”

“Quite enough,” said the woman over the gate. “Thenks”; and all three
of them laughed.

I felt foolish and angry. I tried and found I could not tell them what
I had seen. They laughed again at my broken sentences.

“You’ll hear more yet,” I said, and went on to my home.

I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I. I went into the
dining room, sat down, drank some wine, and so soon as I could collect
myself sufficiently I told her the things I had seen. The dinner, which
was a cold one, had already been served, and remained neglected on the
table while I told my story.

“There is one thing,” I said, to allay the fears I had aroused; “they
are the most sluggish things I ever saw crawl. They may keep the pit
and kill people who come near them, but they cannot get out of it. . .
. But the horror of them!”

“Don’t, dear!” said my wife, knitting her brows and putting her hand on
mine.

“Poor Ogilvy!” I said. “To think he may be lying dead there!”

My wife at least did not find my experience incredible. When I saw how
deadly white her face was, I ceased abruptly.

“They may come here,” she said again and again.

I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her.

“They can scarcely move,” I said.

I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that Ogilvy had told
me of the impossibility of the Martians establishing themselves on the
earth. In particular I laid stress on the gravitational difficulty. On
the surface of the earth the force of gravity is three times what it is
on the surface of Mars. A Martian, therefore, would weigh three times
more than on Mars, albeit his muscular strength would be the same. His
own body would be a cope of lead to him, therefore. That, indeed, was
the general opinion. Both _The Times_ and the _Daily Telegraph_, for
instance, insisted on it the next morning, and both overlooked, just as
I did, two obvious modifying influences.

The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, contains far more oxygen or
far less argon (whichever way one likes to put it) than does Mars’. The
invigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martians
indisputably did much to counterbalance the increased weight of their
bodies. And, in the second place, we all overlooked the fact that such
mechanical intelligence as the Martian possessed was quite able to
dispense with muscular exertion at a pinch.

But I did not consider these points at the time, and so my reasoning
was dead against the chances of the invaders. With wine and food, the
confidence of my own table, and the necessity of reassuring my wife, I
grew by insensible degrees courageous and secure.

“They have done a foolish thing,” said I, fingering my wineglass. “They
are dangerous because, no doubt, they are mad with terror. Perhaps they
expected to find no living things—certainly no intelligent living
things.”

“A shell in the pit,” said I, “if the worst comes to the worst, will
kill them all.”

The intense excitement of the events had no doubt left my perceptive
powers in a state of erethism. I remember that dinner table with
extraordinary vividness even now. My dear wife’s sweet anxious face
peering at me from under the pink lamp shade, the white cloth with its
silver and glass table furniture—for in those days even philosophical
writers had many little luxuries—the crimson-purple wine in my glass,
are photographically distinct. At the end of it I sat, tempering nuts
with a cigarette, regretting Ogilvy’s rashness, and denouncing the
short-sighted timidity of the Martians.

So some respectable dodo in the Mauritius might have lorded it in his
nest, and discussed the arrival of that shipful of pitiless sailors in
want of animal food. “We will peck them to death tomorrow, my dear.”

I did not know it, but that was the last civilised dinner I was to eat
for very many strange and terrible days.




VIII.
FRIDAY NIGHT.


The most extraordinary thing to my mind, of all the strange and
wonderful things that happened upon that Friday, was the dovetailing of
the commonplace habits of our social order with the first beginnings of
the series of events that was to topple that social order headlong. If
on Friday night you had taken a pair of compasses and drawn a circle
with a radius of five miles round the Woking sand-pits, I doubt if you
would have had one human being outside it, unless it were some relation
of Stent or of the three or four cyclists or London people lying dead
on the common, whose emotions or habits were at all affected by the
new-comers. Many people had heard of the cylinder, of course, and
talked about it in their leisure, but it certainly did not make the
sensation that an ultimatum to Germany would have done.

In London that night poor Henderson’s telegram describing the gradual
unscrewing of the shot was judged to be a canard, and his evening
paper, after wiring for authentication from him and receiving no
reply—the man was killed—decided not to print a special edition.

Even within the five-mile circle the great majority of people were
inert. I have already described the behaviour of the men and women to
whom I spoke. All over the district people were dining and supping;
working men were gardening after the labours of the day, children were
being put to bed, young people were wandering through the lanes
love-making, students sat over their books.

Maybe there was a murmur in the village streets, a novel and dominant
topic in the public-houses, and here and there a messenger, or even an
eye-witness of the later occurrences, caused a whirl of excitement, a
shouting, and a running to and fro; but for the most part the daily
routine of working, eating, drinking, sleeping, went on as it had done
for countless years—as though no planet Mars existed in the sky. Even
at Woking station and Horsell and Chobham that was the case.

In Woking junction, until a late hour, trains were stopping and going
on, others were shunting on the sidings, passengers were alighting and
waiting, and everything was proceeding in the most ordinary way. A boy
from the town, trenching on Smith’s monopoly, was selling papers with
the afternoon’s news. The ringing impact of trucks, the sharp whistle
of the engines from the junction, mingled with their shouts of “Men
from Mars!” Excited men came into the station about nine o’clock with
incredible tidings, and caused no more disturbance than drunkards might
have done. People rattling Londonwards peered into the darkness outside
the carriage windows, and saw only a rare, flickering, vanishing spark
dance up from the direction of Horsell, a red glow and a thin veil of
smoke driving across the stars, and thought that nothing more serious
than a heath fire was happening. It was only round the edge of the
common that any disturbance was perceptible. There were half a dozen
villas burning on the Woking border. There were lights in all the
houses on the common side of the three villages, and the people there
kept awake till dawn.

A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people coming and going but the
crowd remaining, both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges. One or two
adventurous souls, it was afterwards found, went into the darkness and
crawled quite near the Martians; but they never returned, for now and
again a light-ray, like the beam of a warship’s searchlight swept the
common, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow. Save for such, that big
area of common was silent and desolate, and the charred bodies lay
about on it all night under the stars, and all the next day. A noise of
hammering from the pit was heard by many people.

So you have the state of things on Friday night. In the centre,
sticking into the skin of our old planet Earth like a poisoned dart,
was this cylinder. But the poison was scarcely working yet. Around it
was a patch of silent common, smouldering in places, and with a few
dark, dimly seen objects lying in contorted attitudes here and there.
Here and there was a burning bush or tree. Beyond was a fringe of
excitement, and farther than that fringe the inflammation had not crept
as yet. In the rest of the world the stream of life still flowed as it
had flowed for immemorial years. The fever of war that would presently
clog vein and artery, deaden nerve and destroy brain, had still to
develop.

All night long the Martians were hammering and stirring, sleepless,
indefatigable, at work upon the machines they were making ready, and
ever and again a puff of greenish-white smoke whirled up to the starlit
sky.

About eleven a company of soldiers came through Horsell, and deployed
along the edge of the common to form a cordon. Later a second company
marched through Chobham to deploy on the north side of the common.
Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on the common
earlier in the day, and one, Major Eden, was reported to be missing.
The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge and was busy
questioning the crowd at midnight. The military authorities were
certainly alive to the seriousness of the business. About eleven, the
next morning’s papers were able to say, a squadron of hussars, two
Maxims, and about four hundred men of the Cardigan regiment started
from Aldershot.

A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the Chertsey road, Woking,
saw a star fall from heaven into the pine woods to the northwest. It
had a greenish colour, and caused a silent brightness like summer
lightning. This was the second cylinder.




IX.
THE FIGHTING BEGINS.


Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense. It was a day of
lassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, a rapidly fluctuating
barometer. I had slept but little, though my wife had succeeded in
sleeping, and I rose early. I went into my garden before breakfast and
stood listening, but towards the common there was nothing stirring but
a lark.

The milkman came as usual. I heard the rattle of his chariot and I went
round to the side gate to ask the latest news. He told me that during
the night the Martians had been surrounded by troops, and that guns
were expected. Then—a familiar, reassuring note—I heard a train running
towards Woking.

“They aren’t to be killed,” said the milkman, “if that can possibly be
avoided.”

I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a time, and then
strolled in to breakfast. It was a most unexceptional morning. My
neighbour was of opinion that the troops would be able to capture or to
destroy the Martians during the day.

“It’s a pity they make themselves so unapproachable,” he said. “It
would be curious to know how they live on another planet; we might
learn a thing or two.”

He came up to the fence and extended a handful of strawberries, for his
gardening was as generous as it was enthusiastic. At the same time he
told me of the burning of the pine woods about the Byfleet Golf Links.

“They say,” said he, “that there’s another of those blessed things
fallen there—number two. But one’s enough, surely. This lot’ll cost the
insurance people a pretty penny before everything’s settled.” He
laughed with an air of the greatest good humour as he said this. The
woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a haze of smoke to
me. “They will be hot under foot for days, on account of the thick soil
of pine needles and turf,” he said, and then grew serious over “poor
Ogilvy.”

After breakfast, instead of working, I decided to walk down towards the
common. Under the railway bridge I found a group of soldiers—sappers, I
think, men in small round caps, dirty red jackets unbuttoned, and
showing their blue shirts, dark trousers, and boots coming to the calf.
They told me no one was allowed over the canal, and, looking along the
road towards the bridge, I saw one of the Cardigan men standing
sentinel there. I talked with these soldiers for a time; I told them of
my sight of the Martians on the previous evening. None of them had seen
the Martians, and they had but the vaguest ideas of them, so that they
plied me with questions. They said that they did not know who had
authorised the movements of the troops; their idea was that a dispute
had arisen at the Horse Guards. The ordinary sapper is a great deal
better educated than the common soldier, and they discussed the
peculiar conditions of the possible fight with some acuteness. I
described the Heat-Ray to them, and they began to argue among
themselves.

“Crawl up under cover and rush ’em, say I,” said one.

“Get aht!” said another. “What’s cover against this ’ere ’eat? Sticks
to cook yer! What we got to do is to go as near as the ground’ll let
us, and then drive a trench.”

“Blow yer trenches! You always want trenches; you ought to ha’ been
born a rabbit Snippy.”

“Ain’t they got any necks, then?” said a third, abruptly—a little,
contemplative, dark man, smoking a pipe.

I repeated my description.

“Octopuses,” said he, “that’s what I calls ’em. Talk about fishers of
men—fighters of fish it is this time!”

“It ain’t no murder killing beasts like that,” said the first speaker.

“Why not shell the darned things strite off and finish ’em?” said the
little dark man. “You carn tell what they might do.”

“Where’s your shells?” said the first speaker. “There ain’t no time. Do
it in a rush, that’s my tip, and do it at once.”

So they discussed it. After a while I left them, and went on to the
railway station to get as many morning papers as I could.

But I will not weary the reader with a description of that long morning
and of the longer afternoon. I did not succeed in getting a glimpse of
the common, for even Horsell and Chobham church towers were in the
hands of the military authorities. The soldiers I addressed didn’t know
anything; the officers were mysterious as well as busy. I found people
in the town quite secure again in the presence of the military, and I
heard for the first time from Marshall, the tobacconist, that his son
was among the dead on the common. The soldiers had made the people on
the outskirts of Horsell lock up and leave their houses.

I got back to lunch about two, very tired for, as I have said, the day
was extremely hot and dull; and in order to refresh myself I took a
cold bath in the afternoon. About half past four I went up to the
railway station to get an evening paper, for the morning papers had
contained only a very inaccurate description of the killing of Stent,
Henderson, Ogilvy, and the others. But there was little I didn’t know.
The Martians did not show an inch of themselves. They seemed busy in
their pit, and there was a sound of hammering and an almost continuous
streamer of smoke. Apparently they were busy getting ready for a
struggle. “Fresh attempts have been made to signal, but without
success,” was the stereotyped formula of the papers. A sapper told me
it was done by a man in a ditch with a flag on a long pole. The
Martians took as much notice of such advances as we should of the
lowing of a cow.

I must confess the sight of all this armament, all this preparation,
greatly excited me. My imagination became belligerent, and defeated the
invaders in a dozen striking ways; something of my schoolboy dreams of
battle and heroism came back. It hardly seemed a fair fight to me at
that time. They seemed very helpless in that pit of theirs.

About three o’clock there began the thud of a gun at measured intervals
from Chertsey or Addlestone. I learned that the smouldering pine wood
into which the second cylinder had fallen was being shelled, in the
hope of destroying that object before it opened. It was only about
five, however, that a field gun reached Chobham for use against the
first body of Martians.

About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with my wife in the
summerhouse talking vigorously about the battle that was lowering upon
us, I heard a muffled detonation from the common, and immediately after
a gust of firing. Close on the heels of that came a violent rattling
crash, quite close to us, that shook the ground; and, starting out upon
the lawn, I saw the tops of the trees about the Oriental College burst
into smoky red flame, and the tower of the little church beside it
slide down into ruin. The pinnacle of the mosque had vanished, and the
roof line of the college itself looked as if a hundred-ton gun had been
at work upon it. One of our chimneys cracked as if a shot had hit it,
flew, and a piece of it came clattering down the tiles and made a heap
of broken red fragments upon the flower bed by my study window.

I and my wife stood amazed. Then I realised that the crest of Maybury
Hill must be within range of the Martians’ Heat-Ray now that the
college was cleared out of the way.

At that I gripped my wife’s arm, and without ceremony ran her out into
the road. Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I would go
upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for.

“We can’t possibly stay here,” I said; and as I spoke the firing
reopened for a moment upon the common.

“But where are we to go?” said my wife in terror.

I thought perplexed. Then I remembered her cousins at Leatherhead.

“Leatherhead!” I shouted above the sudden noise.

She looked away from me downhill. The people were coming out of their
houses, astonished.

“How are we to get to Leatherhead?” she said.

Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars ride under the railway bridge;
three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental College; two
others dismounted, and began running from house to house. The sun,
shining through the smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees,
seemed blood red, and threw an unfamiliar lurid light upon everything.

“Stop here,” said I; “you are safe here”; and I started off at once for
the Spotted Dog, for I knew the landlord had a horse and dog cart. I
ran, for I perceived that in a moment everyone upon this side of the
hill would be moving. I found him in his bar, quite unaware of what was
going on behind his house. A man stood with his back to me, talking to
him.

“I must have a pound,” said the landlord, “and I’ve no one to drive
it.”

“I’ll give you two,” said I, over the stranger’s shoulder.

“What for?”

“And I’ll bring it back by midnight,” I said.

“Lord!” said the landlord; “what’s the hurry? I’m selling my bit of a
pig. Two pounds, and you bring it back? What’s going on now?”

I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured the dog
cart. At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent that the
landlord should leave his. I took care to have the cart there and then,
drove it off down the road, and, leaving it in charge of my wife and
servant, rushed into my house and packed a few valuables, such plate as
we had, and so forth. The beech trees below the house were burning
while I did this, and the palings up the road glowed red. While I was
occupied in this way, one of the dismounted hussars came running up. He
was going from house to house, warning people to leave. He was going on
as I came out of my front door, lugging my treasures, done up in a
tablecloth. I shouted after him:

“What news?”

He turned, stared, bawled something about “crawling out in a thing like
a dish cover,” and ran on to the gate of the house at the crest. A
sudden whirl of black smoke driving across the road hid him for a
moment. I ran to my neighbour’s door and rapped to satisfy myself of
what I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with him and had
locked up their house. I went in again, according to my promise, to get
my servant’s box, lugged it out, clapped it beside her on the tail of
the dog cart, and then caught the reins and jumped up into the driver’s
seat beside my wife. In another moment we were clear of the smoke and
noise, and spanking down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill towards Old
Woking.

In front was a quiet sunny landscape, a wheat field ahead on either
side of the road, and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign. I saw the
doctor’s cart ahead of me. At the bottom of the hill I turned my head
to look at the hillside I was leaving. Thick streamers of black smoke
shot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still air, and
throwing dark shadows upon the green treetops eastward. The smoke
already extended far away to the east and west—to the Byfleet pine
woods eastward, and to Woking on the west. The road was dotted with
people running towards us. And very faint now, but very distinct
through the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a machine-gun that
was presently stilled, and an intermittent cracking of rifles.
Apparently the Martians were setting fire to everything within range of
their Heat-Ray.

I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my attention
to the horse. When I looked back again the second hill had hidden the
black smoke. I slashed the horse with the whip, and gave him a loose
rein until Woking and Send lay between us and that quivering tumult. I
overtook and passed the doctor between Woking and Send.




X.
IN THE STORM.


Leatherhead is about twelve miles from Maybury Hill. The scent of hay
was in the air through the lush meadows beyond Pyrford, and the hedges
on either side were sweet and gay with multitudes of dog-roses. The
heavy firing that had broken out while we were driving down Maybury
Hill ceased as abruptly as it began, leaving the evening very peaceful
and still. We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about nine
o’clock, and the horse had an hour’s rest while I took supper with my
cousins and commended my wife to their care.

My wife was curiously silent throughout the drive, and seemed oppressed
with forebodings of evil. I talked to her reassuringly, pointing out
that the Martians were tied to the pit by sheer heaviness, and at the
utmost could but crawl a little out of it; but she answered only in
monosyllables. Had it not been for my promise to the innkeeper, she
would, I think, have urged me to stay in Leatherhead that night. Would
that I had! Her face, I remember, was very white as we parted.

For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day. Something very
like the war fever that occasionally runs through a civilised community
had got into my blood, and in my heart I was not so very sorry that I
had to return to Maybury that night. I was even afraid that that last
fusillade I had heard might mean the extermination of our invaders from
Mars. I can best express my state of mind by saying that I wanted to be
in at the death.

It was nearly eleven when I started to return. The night was
unexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted passage of my
cousins’ house, it seemed indeed black, and it was as hot and close as
the day. Overhead the clouds were driving fast, albeit not a breath
stirred the shrubs about us. My cousins’ man lit both lamps. Happily, I
knew the road intimately. My wife stood in the light of the doorway,
and watched me until I jumped up into the dog cart. Then abruptly she
turned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side wishing me good
hap.

I was a little depressed at first with the contagion of my wife’s
fears, but very soon my thoughts reverted to the Martians. At that time
I was absolutely in the dark as to the course of the evening’s
fighting. I did not know even the circumstances that had precipitated
the conflict. As I came through Ockham (for that was the way I
returned, and not through Send and Old Woking) I saw along the western
horizon a blood-red glow, which as I drew nearer, crept slowly up the
sky. The driving clouds of the gathering thunderstorm mingled there
with masses of black and red smoke.

Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a lighted window or so the
village showed not a sign of life; but I narrowly escaped an accident
at the corner of the road to Pyrford, where a knot of people stood with
their backs to me. They said nothing to me as I passed. I do not know
what they knew of the things happening beyond the hill, nor do I know
if the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping securely, or
deserted and empty, or harassed and watching against the terror of the
night.

From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I was in the valley of the
Wey, and the red glare was hidden from me. As I ascended the little
hill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into view again, and the
trees about me shivered with the first intimation of the storm that was
upon me. Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford Church behind
me, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with its tree-tops
and roofs black and sharp against the red.

Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me and
showed the distant woods towards Addlestone. I felt a tug at the reins.
I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by a thread
of green fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling into the
field to my left. It was the third falling star!

Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by contrast, danced out
the first lightning of the gathering storm, and the thunder burst like
a rocket overhead. The horse took the bit between his teeth and bolted.

A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and down this
we clattered. Once the lightning had begun, it went on in as rapid a
succession of flashes as I have ever seen. The thunderclaps, treading
one on the heels of another and with a strange crackling accompaniment,
sounded more like the working of a gigantic electric machine than the
usual detonating reverberations. The flickering light was blinding and
confusing, and a thin hail smote gustily at my face as I drove down the
slope.

At first I regarded little but the road before me, and then abruptly my
attention was arrested by something that was moving rapidly down the
opposite slope of Maybury Hill. At first I took it for the wet roof of
a house, but one flash following another showed it to be in swift
rolling movement. It was an elusive vision—a moment of bewildering
darkness, and then, in a flash like daylight, the red masses of the
Orphanage near the crest of the hill, the green tops of the pine trees,
and this problematical object came out clear and sharp and bright.

And this Thing I saw! How can I describe it? A monstrous tripod, higher
than many houses, striding over the young pine trees, and smashing them
aside in its career; a walking engine of glittering metal, striding now
across the heather; articulate ropes of steel dangling from it, and the
clattering tumult of its passage mingling with the riot of the thunder.
A flash, and it came out vividly, heeling over one way with two feet in
the air, to vanish and reappear almost instantly as it seemed, with the
next flash, a hundred yards nearer. Can you imagine a milking stool
tilted and bowled violently along the ground? That was the impression
those instant flashes gave. But instead of a milking stool imagine it a
great body of machinery on a tripod stand.

Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were parted, as
brittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them; they were
snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod appeared,
rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me. And I was galloping hard to
meet it! At the sight of the second monster my nerve went altogether.
Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the horse’s head hard round to
the right and in another moment the dog cart had heeled over upon the
horse; the shafts smashed noisily, and I was flung sideways and fell
heavily into a shallow pool of water.

I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my feet still in the
water, under a clump of furze. The horse lay motionless (his neck was
broken, poor brute!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the black bulk
of the overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel still
spinning slowly. In another moment the colossal mechanism went striding
by me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford.

Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it was no mere
insensate machine driving on its way. Machine it was, with a ringing
metallic pace, and long, flexible, glittering tentacles (one of which
gripped a young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its strange
body. It picked its road as it went striding along, and the brazen hood
that surmounted it moved to and fro with the inevitable suggestion of a
head looking about. Behind the main body was a huge mass of white metal
like a gigantic fisherman’s basket, and puffs of green smoke squirted
out from the joints of the limbs as the monster swept by me. And in an
instant it was gone.

So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of the lightning, in
blinding highlights and dense black shadows.

As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that drowned the
thunder—“Aloo! Aloo!”—and in another minute it was with its companion,
half a mile away, stooping over something in the field. I have no doubt
this Thing in the field was the third of the ten cylinders they had
fired at us from Mars.

For some minutes I lay there in the rain and darkness watching, by the
intermittent light, these monstrous beings of metal moving about in the
distance over the hedge tops. A thin hail was now beginning, and as it
came and went their figures grew misty and then flashed into clearness
again. Now and then came a gap in the lightning, and the night
swallowed them up.

I was soaked with hail above and puddle water below. It was some time
before my blank astonishment would let me struggle up the bank to a
drier position, or think at all of my imminent peril.

Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatter’s hut of wood,
surrounded by a patch of potato garden. I struggled to my feet at last,
and, crouching and making use of every chance of cover, I made a run
for this. I hammered at the door, but I could not make the people hear
(if there were any people inside), and after a time I desisted, and,
availing myself of a ditch for the greater part of the way, succeeded
in crawling, unobserved by these monstrous machines, into the pine
woods towards Maybury.

Under cover of this I pushed on, wet and shivering now, towards my own
house. I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath. It was
very dark indeed in the wood, for the lightning was now becoming
infrequent, and the hail, which was pouring down in a torrent, fell in
columns through the gaps in the heavy foliage.

If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen I
should have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to Street
Cobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead. But that
night the strangeness of things about me, and my physical wretchedness,
prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, wet to the skin, deafened and
blinded by the storm.

I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as much
motive as I had. I staggered through the trees, fell into a ditch and
bruised my knees against a plank, and finally splashed out into the
lane that ran down from the College Arms. I say splashed, for the storm
water was sweeping the sand down the hill in a muddy torrent. There in
the darkness a man blundered into me and sent me reeling back.

He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed on before I could
gather my wits sufficiently to speak to him. So heavy was the stress of
the storm just at this place that I had the hardest task to win my way
up the hill. I went close up to the fence on the left and worked my way
along its palings.

Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a flash of
lightning, saw between my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair of
boots. Before I could distinguish clearly how the man lay, the flicker
of light had passed. I stood over him waiting for the next flash. When
it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply but not shabbily
dressed; his head was bent under his body, and he lay crumpled up close
to the fence, as though he had been flung violently against it.

Overcoming the repugnance natural to one who had never before touched a
dead body, I stooped and turned him over to feel for his heart. He was
quite dead. Apparently his neck had been broken. The lightning flashed
for a third time, and his face leaped upon me. I sprang to my feet. It
was the landlord of the Spotted Dog, whose conveyance I had taken.

I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill. I made my way by
the police station and the College Arms towards my own house. Nothing
was burning on the hillside, though from the common there still came a
red glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke beating up against the
drenching hail. So far as I could see by the flashes, the houses about
me were mostly uninjured. By the College Arms a dark heap lay in the
road.

Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the sound of
feet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them. I let myself
in with my latchkey, closed, locked and bolted the door, staggered to
the foot of the staircase, and sat down. My imagination was full of
those striding metallic monsters, and of the dead body smashed against
the fence.

I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to the wall,
shivering violently.




XI.
AT THE WINDOW.


I have already said that my storms of emotion have a trick of
exhausting themselves. After a time I discovered that I was cold and
wet, and with little pools of water about me on the stair carpet. I got
up almost mechanically, went into the dining room and drank some
whisky, and then I was moved to change my clothes.

After I had done that I went upstairs to my study, but why I did so I
do not know. The window of my study looks over the trees and the
railway towards Horsell Common. In the hurry of our departure this
window had been left open. The passage was dark, and, by contrast with
the picture the window frame enclosed, the side of the room seemed
impenetrably dark. I stopped short in the doorway.

The thunderstorm had passed. The towers of the Oriental College and the
pine trees about it had gone, and very far away, lit by a vivid red
glare, the common about the sand-pits was visible. Across the light
huge black shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to and fro.

It seemed indeed as if the whole country in that direction was on
fire—a broad hillside set with minute tongues of flame, swaying and
writhing with the gusts of the dying storm, and throwing a red
reflection upon the cloud scud above. Every now and then a haze of
smoke from some nearer conflagration drove across the window and hid
the Martian shapes. I could not see what they were doing, nor the clear
form of them, nor recognise the black objects they were busied upon.
Neither could I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of it
danced on the wall and ceiling of the study. A sharp, resinous tang of
burning was in the air.

I closed the door noiselessly and crept towards the window. As I did
so, the view opened out until, on the one hand, it reached to the
houses about Woking station, and on the other to the charred and
blackened pine woods of Byfleet. There was a light down below the hill,
on the railway, near the arch, and several of the houses along the
Maybury road and the streets near the station were glowing ruins. The
light upon the railway puzzled me at first; there were a black heap and
a vivid glare, and to the right of that a row of yellow oblongs. Then I
perceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part smashed and on fire,
the hinder carriages still upon the rails.

Between these three main centres of light—the houses, the train, and
the burning county towards Chobham—stretched irregular patches of dark
country, broken here and there by intervals of dimly glowing and
smoking ground. It was the strangest spectacle, that black expanse set
with fire. It reminded me, more than anything else, of the Potteries at
night. At first I could distinguish no people at all, though I peered
intently for them. Later I saw against the light of Woking station a
number of black figures hurrying one after the other across the line.

And this was the little world in which I had been living securely for
years, this fiery chaos! What had happened in the last seven hours I
still did not know; nor did I know, though I was beginning to guess,
the relation between these mechanical colossi and the sluggish lumps I
had seen disgorged from the cylinder. With a queer feeling of
impersonal interest I turned my desk chair to the window, sat down, and
stared at the blackened country, and particularly at the three gigantic
black things that were going to and fro in the glare about the
sand-pits.

They seemed amazingly busy. I began to ask myself what they could be.
Were they intelligent mechanisms? Such a thing I felt was impossible.
Or did a Martian sit within each, ruling, directing, using, much as a
man’s brain sits and rules in his body? I began to compare the things
to human machines, to ask myself for the first time in my life how an
ironclad or a steam engine would seem to an intelligent lower animal.

The storm had left the sky clear, and over the smoke of the burning
land the little fading pinpoint of Mars was dropping into the west,
when a soldier came into my garden. I heard a slight scraping at the
fence, and rousing myself from the lethargy that had fallen upon me, I
looked down and saw him dimly, clambering over the palings. At the
sight of another human being my torpor passed, and I leaned out of the
window eagerly.

“Hist!” said I, in a whisper.

He stopped astride of the fence in doubt. Then he came over and across
the lawn to the corner of the house. He bent down and stepped softly.

“Who’s there?” he said, also whispering, standing under the window and
peering up.

“Where are you going?” I asked.

“God knows.”

“Are you trying to hide?”

“That’s it.”

“Come into the house,” I said.

I went down, unfastened the door, and let him in, and locked the door
again. I could not see his face. He was hatless, and his coat was
unbuttoned.

“My God!” he said, as I drew him in.

“What has happened?” I asked.

“What hasn’t?” In the obscurity I could see he made a gesture of
despair. “They wiped us out—simply wiped us out,” he repeated again and
again.

He followed me, almost mechanically, into the dining room.

“Take some whisky,” I said, pouring out a stiff dose.

He drank it. Then abruptly he sat down before the table, put his head
on his arms, and began to sob and weep like a little boy, in a perfect
passion of emotion, while I, with a curious forgetfulness of my own
recent despair, stood beside him, wondering.

It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to answer my
questions, and then he answered perplexingly and brokenly. He was a
driver in the artillery, and had only come into action about seven. At
that time firing was going on across the common, and it was said the
first party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their second
cylinder under cover of a metal shield.

Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs and became the first of
the fighting-machines I had seen. The gun he drove had been unlimbered
near Horsell, in order to command the sand-pits, and its arrival it was
that had precipitated the action. As the limber gunners went to the
rear, his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came down, throwing him into
a depression of the ground. At the same moment the gun exploded behind
him, the ammunition blew up, there was fire all about him, and he found
himself lying under a heap of charred dead men and dead horses.

“I lay still,” he said, “scared out of my wits, with the fore quarter
of a horse atop of me. We’d been wiped out. And the smell—good God!
Like burnt meat! I was hurt across the back by the fall of the horse,
and there I had to lie until I felt better. Just like parade it had
been a minute before—then stumble, bang, swish!”

“Wiped out!” he said.

He had hid under the dead horse for a long time, peeping out furtively
across the common. The Cardigan men had tried a rush, in skirmishing
order, at the pit, simply to be swept out of existence. Then the
monster had risen to its feet and had begun to walk leisurely to and
fro across the common among the few fugitives, with its headlike hood
turning about exactly like the head of a cowled human being. A kind of
arm carried a complicated metallic case, about which green flashes
scintillated, and out of the funnel of this there smoked the Heat-Ray.

In a few minutes there was, so far as the soldier could see, not a
living thing left upon the common, and every bush and tree upon it that
was not already a blackened skeleton was burning. The hussars had been
on the road beyond the curvature of the ground, and he saw nothing of
them. He heard the Maxims rattle for a time and then become still. The
giant saved Woking station and its cluster of houses until the last;
then in a moment the Heat-Ray was brought to bear, and the town became
a heap of fiery ruins. Then the Thing shut off the Heat-Ray, and
turning its back upon the artilleryman, began to waddle away towards
the smouldering pine woods that sheltered the second cylinder. As it
did so a second glittering Titan built itself up out of the pit.

The second monster followed the first, and at that the artilleryman
began to crawl very cautiously across the hot heather ash towards
Horsell. He managed to get alive into the ditch by the side of the
road, and so escaped to Woking. There his story became ejaculatory. The
place was impassable. It seems there were a few people alive there,
frantic for the most part and many burned and scalded. He was turned
aside by the fire, and hid among some almost scorching heaps of broken
wall as one of the Martian giants returned. He saw this one pursue a
man, catch him up in one of its steely tentacles, and knock his head
against the trunk of a pine tree. At last, after nightfall, the
artilleryman made a rush for it and got over the railway embankment.

Since then he had been skulking along towards Maybury, in the hope of
getting out of danger Londonward. People were hiding in trenches and
cellars, and many of the survivors had made off towards Woking village
and Send. He had been consumed with thirst until he found one of the
water mains near the railway arch smashed, and the water bubbling out
like a spring upon the road.

That was the story I got from him, bit by bit. He grew calmer telling
me and trying to make me see the things he had seen. He had eaten no
food since midday, he told me early in his narrative, and I found some
mutton and bread in the pantry and brought it into the room. We lit no
lamp for fear of attracting the Martians, and ever and again our hands
would touch upon bread or meat. As he talked, things about us came
darkly out of the darkness, and the trampled bushes and broken rose
trees outside the window grew distinct. It would seem that a number of
men or animals had rushed across the lawn. I began to see his face,
blackened and haggard, as no doubt mine was also.

When we had finished eating we went softly upstairs to my study, and I
looked again out of the open window. In one night the valley had become
a valley of ashes. The fires had dwindled now. Where flames had been
there were now streamers of smoke; but the countless ruins of shattered
and gutted houses and blasted and blackened trees that the night had
hidden stood out now gaunt and terrible in the pitiless light of dawn.
Yet here and there some object had had the luck to escape—a white
railway signal here, the end of a greenhouse there, white and fresh
amid the wreckage. Never before in the history of warfare had
destruction been so indiscriminate and so universal. And shining with
the growing light of the east, three of the metallic giants stood about
the pit, their cowls rotating as though they were surveying the
desolation they had made.

It seemed to me that the pit had been enlarged, and ever and again
puffs of vivid green vapour streamed up and out of it towards the
brightening dawn—streamed up, whirled, broke, and vanished.

Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham. They became pillars of
bloodshot smoke at the first touch of day.




XII.
WHAT I SAW OF THE DESTRUCTION OF WEYBRIDGE AND SHEPPERTON.


As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew from the window from which we had
watched the Martians, and went very quietly downstairs.

The artilleryman agreed with me that the house was no place to stay in.
He proposed, he said, to make his way Londonward, and thence rejoin his
battery—No. 12, of the Horse Artillery. My plan was to return at once
to Leatherhead; and so greatly had the strength of the Martians
impressed me that I had determined to take my wife to Newhaven, and go
with her out of the country forthwith. For I already perceived clearly
that the country about London must inevitably be the scene of a
disastrous struggle before such creatures as these could be destroyed.

Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third cylinder, with its
guarding giants. Had I been alone, I think I should have taken my
chance and struck across country. But the artilleryman dissuaded me:
“It’s no kindness to the right sort of wife,” he said, “to make her a
widow”; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under cover of the
woods, northward as far as Street Cobham before I parted with him.
Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom to reach Leatherhead.

I should have started at once, but my companion had been in active
service and he knew better than that. He made me ransack the house for
a flask, which he filled with whisky; and we lined every available
pocket with packets of biscuits and slices of meat. Then we crept out
of the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the ill-made road by
which I had come overnight. The houses seemed deserted. In the road lay
a group of three charred bodies close together, struck dead by the
Heat-Ray; and here and there were things that people had dropped—a
clock, a slipper, a silver spoon, and the like poor valuables. At the
corner turning up towards the post office a little cart, filled with
boxes and furniture, and horseless, heeled over on a broken wheel. A
cash box had been hastily smashed open and thrown under the debris.

Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which was still on fire, none of the
houses had suffered very greatly here. The Heat-Ray had shaved the
chimney tops and passed. Yet, save ourselves, there did not seem to be
a living soul on Maybury Hill. The majority of the inhabitants had
escaped, I suppose, by way of the Old Woking road—the road I had taken
when I drove to Leatherhead—or they had hidden.

We went down the lane, by the body of the man in black, sodden now from
the overnight hail, and broke into the woods at the foot of the hill.
We pushed through these towards the railway without meeting a soul. The
woods across the line were but the scarred and blackened ruins of
woods; for the most part the trees had fallen, but a certain proportion
still stood, dismal grey stems, with dark brown foliage instead of
green.

On our side the fire had done no more than scorch the nearer trees; it
had failed to secure its footing. In one place the woodmen had been at
work on Saturday; trees, felled and freshly trimmed, lay in a clearing,
with heaps of sawdust by the sawing-machine and its engine. Hard by was
a temporary hut, deserted. There was not a breath of wind this morning,
and everything was strangely still. Even the birds were hushed, and as
we hurried along I and the artilleryman talked in whispers and looked
now and again over our shoulders. Once or twice we stopped to listen.

After a time we drew near the road, and as we did so we heard the
clatter of hoofs and saw through the tree stems three cavalry soldiers
riding slowly towards Woking. We hailed them, and they halted while we
hurried towards them. It was a lieutenant and a couple of privates of
the 8th Hussars, with a stand like a theodolite, which the artilleryman
told me was a heliograph.

“You are the first men I’ve seen coming this way this morning,” said
the lieutenant. “What’s brewing?”

His voice and face were eager. The men behind him stared curiously. The
artilleryman jumped down the bank into the road and saluted.

“Gun destroyed last night, sir. Have been hiding. Trying to rejoin
battery, sir. You’ll come in sight of the Martians, I expect, about
half a mile along this road.”

“What the dickens are they like?” asked the lieutenant.

“Giants in armour, sir. Hundred feet high. Three legs and a body like
’luminium, with a mighty great head in a hood, sir.”

“Get out!” said the lieutenant. “What confounded nonsense!”

“You’ll see, sir. They carry a kind of box, sir, that shoots fire and
strikes you dead.”

“What d’ye mean—a gun?”

“No, sir,” and the artilleryman began a vivid account of the Heat-Ray.
Halfway through, the lieutenant interrupted him and looked up at me. I
was still standing on the bank by the side of the road.

“It’s perfectly true,” I said.

“Well,” said the lieutenant, “I suppose it’s my business to see it too.
Look here”—to the artilleryman—“we’re detailed here clearing people out
of their houses. You’d better go along and report yourself to
Brigadier-General Marvin, and tell him all you know. He’s at Weybridge.
Know the way?”

“I do,” I said; and he turned his horse southward again.

“Half a mile, you say?” said he.

“At most,” I answered, and pointed over the treetops southward. He
thanked me and rode on, and we saw them no more.

Farther along we came upon a group of three women and two children in
the road, busy clearing out a labourer’s cottage. They had got hold of
a little hand truck, and were piling it up with unclean-looking bundles
and shabby furniture. They were all too assiduously engaged to talk to
us as we passed.

By Byfleet station we emerged from the pine trees, and found the
country calm and peaceful under the morning sunlight. We were far
beyond the range of the Heat-Ray there, and had it not been for the
silent desertion of some of the houses, the stirring movement of
packing in others, and the knot of soldiers standing on the bridge over
the railway and staring down the line towards Woking, the day would
have seemed very like any other Sunday.

Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily along the road to
Addlestone, and suddenly through the gate of a field we saw, across a
stretch of flat meadow, six twelve-pounders standing neatly at equal
distances pointing towards Woking. The gunners stood by the guns
waiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-like distance.
The men stood almost as if under inspection.

“That’s good!” said I. “They will get one fair shot, at any rate.”

The artilleryman hesitated at the gate.

“I shall go on,” he said.

Farther on towards Weybridge, just over the bridge, there were a number
of men in white fatigue jackets throwing up a long rampart, and more
guns behind.

“It’s bows and arrows against the lightning, anyhow,” said the
artilleryman. “They ’aven’t seen that fire-beam yet.”

The officers who were not actively engaged stood and stared over the
treetops southwestward, and the men digging would stop every now and
again to stare in the same direction.

Byfleet was in a tumult; people packing, and a score of hussars, some
of them dismounted, some on horseback, were hunting them about. Three
or four black government waggons, with crosses in white circles, and an
old omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded in the village
street. There were scores of people, most of them sufficiently
sabbatical to have assumed their best clothes. The soldiers were having
the greatest difficulty in making them realise the gravity of their
position. We saw one shrivelled old fellow with a huge box and a score
or more of flower pots containing orchids, angrily expostulating with
the corporal who would leave them behind. I stopped and gripped his
arm.

“Do you know what’s over there?” I said, pointing at the pine tops that
hid the Martians.

“Eh?” said he, turning. “I was explainin’ these is vallyble.”

“Death!” I shouted. “Death is coming! Death!” and leaving him to digest
that if he could, I hurried on after the artillery-man. At the corner I
looked back. The soldier had left him, and he was still standing by his
box, with the pots of orchids on the lid of it, and staring vaguely
over the trees.

No one in Weybridge could tell us where the headquarters were
established; the whole place was in such confusion as I had never seen
in any town before. Carts, carriages everywhere, the most astonishing
miscellany of conveyances and horseflesh. The respectable inhabitants
of the place, men in golf and boating costumes, wives prettily dressed,
were packing, river-side loafers energetically helping, children
excited, and, for the most part, highly delighted at this astonishing
variation of their Sunday experiences. In the midst of it all the
worthy vicar was very pluckily holding an early celebration, and his
bell was jangling out above the excitement.

I and the artilleryman, seated on the step of the drinking fountain,
made a very passable meal upon what we had brought with us. Patrols of
soldiers—here no longer hussars, but grenadiers in white—were warning
people to move now or to take refuge in their cellars as soon as the
firing began. We saw as we crossed the railway bridge that a growing
crowd of people had assembled in and about the railway station, and the
swarming platform was piled with boxes and packages. The ordinary
traffic had been stopped, I believe, in order to allow of the passage
of troops and guns to Chertsey, and I have heard since that a savage
struggle occurred for places in the special trains that were put on at
a later hour.

We remained at Weybridge until midday, and at that hour we found
ourselves at the place near Shepperton Lock where the Wey and Thames
join. Part of the time we spent helping two old women to pack a little
cart. The Wey has a treble mouth, and at this point boats are to be
hired, and there was a ferry across the river. On the Shepperton side
was an inn with a lawn, and beyond that the tower of Shepperton
Church—it has been replaced by a spire—rose above the trees.

Here we found an excited and noisy crowd of fugitives. As yet the
flight had not grown to a panic, but there were already far more people
than all the boats going to and fro could enable to cross. People came
panting along under heavy burdens; one husband and wife were even
carrying a small outhouse door between them, with some of their
household goods piled thereon. One man told us he meant to try to get
away from Shepperton station.

There was a lot of shouting, and one man was even jesting. The idea
people seemed to have here was that the Martians were simply formidable
human beings, who might attack and sack the town, to be certainly
destroyed in the end. Every now and then people would glance nervously
across the Wey, at the meadows towards Chertsey, but everything over
there was still.

Across the Thames, except just where the boats landed, everything was
quiet, in vivid contrast with the Surrey side. The people who landed
there from the boats went tramping off down the lane. The big ferryboat
had just made a journey. Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn of
the inn, staring and jesting at the fugitives, without offering to
help. The inn was closed, as it was now within prohibited hours.

“What’s that?” cried a boatman, and “Shut up, you fool!” said a man
near me to a yelping dog. Then the sound came again, this time from the
direction of Chertsey, a muffled thud—the sound of a gun.

The fighting was beginning. Almost immediately unseen batteries across
the river to our right, unseen because of the trees, took up the
chorus, firing heavily one after the other. A woman screamed. Everyone
stood arrested by the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet invisible
to us. Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, cows feeding
unconcernedly for the most part, and silvery pollard willows motionless
in the warm sunlight.

“The sojers’ll stop ’em,” said a woman beside me, doubtfully. A
haziness rose over the treetops.

Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the river, a puff of
smoke that jerked up into the air and hung; and forthwith the ground
heaved under foot and a heavy explosion shook the air, smashing two or
three windows in the houses near, and leaving us astonished.

“Here they are!” shouted a man in a blue jersey. “Yonder! D’yer see
them? Yonder!”

Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the armoured
Martians appeared, far away over the little trees, across the flat
meadows that stretched towards Chertsey, and striding hurriedly towards
the river. Little cowled figures they seemed at first, going with a
rolling motion and as fast as flying birds.

Then, advancing obliquely towards us, came a fifth. Their armoured
bodies glittered in the sun as they swept swiftly forward upon the
guns, growing rapidly larger as they drew nearer. One on the extreme
left, the remotest that is, flourished a huge case high in the air, and
the ghostly, terrible Heat-Ray I had already seen on Friday night smote
towards Chertsey, and struck the town.

At sight of these strange, swift, and terrible creatures the crowd near
the water’s edge seemed to me to be for a moment horror-struck. There
was no screaming or shouting, but a silence. Then a hoarse murmur and a
movement of feet—a splashing from the water. A man, too frightened to
drop the portmanteau he carried on his shoulder, swung round and sent
me staggering with a blow from the corner of his burden. A woman thrust
at me with her hand and rushed past me. I turned with the rush of the
people, but I was not too terrified for thought. The terrible Heat-Ray
was in my mind. To get under water! That was it!

“Get under water!” I shouted, unheeded.

I faced about again, and rushed towards the approaching Martian, rushed
right down the gravelly beach and headlong into the water. Others did
the same. A boatload of people putting back came leaping out as I
rushed past. The stones under my feet were muddy and slippery, and the
river was so low that I ran perhaps twenty feet scarcely waist-deep.
Then, as the Martian towered overhead scarcely a couple of hundred
yards away, I flung myself forward under the surface. The splashes of
the people in the boats leaping into the river sounded like
thunderclaps in my ears. People were landing hastily on both sides of
the river. But the Martian machine took no more notice for the moment
of the people running this way and that than a man would of the
confusion of ants in a nest against which his foot has kicked. When,
half suffocated, I raised my head above water, the Martian’s hood
pointed at the batteries that were still firing across the river, and
as it advanced it swung loose what must have been the generator of the
Heat-Ray.

In another moment it was on the bank, and in a stride wading halfway
across. The knees of its foremost legs bent at the farther bank, and in
another moment it had raised itself to its full height again, close to
the village of Shepperton. Forthwith the six guns which, unknown to
anyone on the right bank, had been hidden behind the outskirts of that
village, fired simultaneously. The sudden near concussion, the last
close upon the first, made my heart jump. The monster was already
raising the case generating the Heat-Ray as the first shell burst six
yards above the hood.

I gave a cry of astonishment. I saw and thought nothing of the other
four Martian monsters; my attention was riveted upon the nearer
incident. Simultaneously two other shells burst in the air near the
body as the hood twisted round in time to receive, but not in time to
dodge, the fourth shell.

The shell burst clean in the face of the Thing. The hood bulged,
flashed, was whirled off in a dozen tattered fragments of red flesh and
glittering metal.

“Hit!” shouted I, with something between a scream and a cheer.

I heard answering shouts from the people in the water about me. I could
have leaped out of the water with that momentary exultation.

The decapitated colossus reeled like a drunken giant; but it did not
fall over. It recovered its balance by a miracle, and, no longer
heeding its steps and with the camera that fired the Heat-Ray now
rigidly upheld, it reeled swiftly upon Shepperton. The living
intelligence, the Martian within the hood, was slain and splashed to
the four winds of heaven, and the Thing was now but a mere intricate
device of metal whirling to destruction. It drove along in a straight
line, incapable of guidance. It struck the tower of Shepperton Church,
smashing it down as the impact of a battering ram might have done,
swerved aside, blundered on and collapsed with tremendous force into
the river out of my sight.

A violent explosion shook the air, and a spout of water, steam, mud,
and shattered metal shot far up into the sky. As the camera of the
Heat-Ray hit the water, the latter had immediately flashed into steam.
In another moment a huge wave, like a muddy tidal bore but almost
scaldingly hot, came sweeping round the bend upstream. I saw people
struggling shorewards, and heard their screaming and shouting faintly
above the seething and roar of the Martian’s collapse.

For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the patent need of
self-preservation. I splashed through the tumultuous water, pushing
aside a man in black to do so, until I could see round the bend. Half a
dozen deserted boats pitched aimlessly upon the confusion of the waves.
The fallen Martian came into sight downstream, lying across the river,
and for the most part submerged.

Thick clouds of steam were pouring off the wreckage, and through the
tumultuously whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and vaguely,
the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash and spray
of mud and froth into the air. The tentacles swayed and struck like
living arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of these
movements, it was as if some wounded thing were struggling for its life
amid the waves. Enormous quantities of a ruddy-brown fluid were
spurting up in noisy jets out of the machine.

My attention was diverted from this death flurry by a furious yelling,
like that of the thing called a siren in our manufacturing towns. A
man, knee-deep near the towing path, shouted inaudibly to me and
pointed. Looking back, I saw the other Martians advancing with gigantic
strides down the riverbank from the direction of Chertsey. The
Shepperton guns spoke this time unavailingly.

At that I ducked at once under water, and, holding my breath until
movement was an agony, blundered painfully ahead under the surface as
long as I could. The water was in a tumult about me, and rapidly
growing hotter.

When for a moment I raised my head to take breath and throw the hair
and water from my eyes, the steam was rising in a whirling white fog
that at first hid the Martians altogether. The noise was deafening.
Then I saw them dimly, colossal figures of grey, magnified by the mist.
They had passed by me, and two were stooping over the frothing,
tumultuous ruins of their comrade.

The third and fourth stood beside him in the water, one perhaps two
hundred yards from me, the other towards Laleham. The generators of the
Heat-Rays waved high, and the hissing beams smote down this way and
that.

The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing conflict of
noises—the clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling houses,
the thud of trees, fences, sheds flashing into flame, and the crackling
and roaring of fire. Dense black smoke was leaping up to mingle with
the steam from the river, and as the Heat-Ray went to and fro over
Weybridge its impact was marked by flashes of incandescent white, that
gave place at once to a smoky dance of lurid flames. The nearer houses
still stood intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy, faint and pallid in
the steam, with the fire behind them going to and fro.

For a moment perhaps I stood there, breast-high in the almost boiling
water, dumbfounded at my position, hopeless of escape. Through the reek
I could see the people who had been with me in the river scrambling out
of the water through the reeds, like little frogs hurrying through
grass from the advance of a man, or running to and fro in utter dismay
on the towing path.

Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came leaping towards
me. The houses caved in as they dissolved at its touch, and darted out
flames; the trees changed to fire with a roar. The Ray flickered up and
down the towing path, licking off the people who ran this way and that,
and came down to the water’s edge not fifty yards from where I stood.
It swept across the river to Shepperton, and the water in its track
rose in a boiling weal crested with steam. I turned shoreward.

In another moment the huge wave, well-nigh at the boiling-point had
rushed upon me. I screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded, agonised,
I staggered through the leaping, hissing water towards the shore. Had
my foot stumbled, it would have been the end. I fell helplessly, in
full sight of the Martians, upon the broad, bare gravelly spit that
runs down to mark the angle of the Wey and Thames. I expected nothing
but death.

I have a dim memory of the foot of a Martian coming down within a score
of yards of my head, driving straight into the loose gravel, whirling
it this way and that and lifting again; of a long suspense, and then of
the four carrying the debris of their comrade between them, now clear
and then presently faint through a veil of smoke, receding
interminably, as it seemed to me, across a vast space of river and
meadow. And then, very slowly, I realised that by a miracle I had
escaped.




XIII.
HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE.


After getting this sudden lesson in the power of terrestrial weapons,
the Martians retreated to their original position upon Horsell Common;
and in their haste, and encumbered with the debris of their smashed
companion, they no doubt overlooked many such a stray and negligible
victim as myself. Had they left their comrade and pushed on forthwith,
there was nothing at that time between them and London but batteries of
twelve-pounder guns, and they would certainly have reached the capital
in advance of the tidings of their approach; as sudden, dreadful, and
destructive their advent would have been as the earthquake that
destroyed Lisbon a century ago.

But they were in no hurry. Cylinder followed cylinder on its
interplanetary flight; every twenty-four hours brought them
reinforcement. And meanwhile the military and naval authorities, now
fully alive to the tremendous power of their antagonists, worked with
furious energy. Every minute a fresh gun came into position until,
before twilight, every copse, every row of suburban villas on the hilly
slopes about Kingston and Richmond, masked an expectant black muzzle.
And through the charred and desolated area—perhaps twenty square miles
altogether—that encircled the Martian encampment on Horsell Common,
through charred and ruined villages among the green trees, through the
blackened and smoking arcades that had been but a day ago pine
spinneys, crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs that were
presently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach. But the Martians
now understood our command of artillery and the danger of human
proximity, and not a man ventured within a mile of either cylinder,
save at the price of his life.

It would seem that these giants spent the earlier part of the afternoon
in going to and fro, transferring everything from the second and third
cylinders—the second in Addlestone Golf Links and the third at
Pyrford—to their original pit on Horsell Common. Over that, above the
blackened heather and ruined buildings that stretched far and wide,
stood one as sentinel, while the rest abandoned their vast
fighting-machines and descended into the pit. They were hard at work
there far into the night, and the towering pillar of dense green smoke
that rose therefrom could be seen from the hills about Merrow, and
even, it is said, from Banstead and Epsom Downs.

And while the Martians behind me were thus preparing for their next
sally, and in front of me Humanity gathered for the battle, I made my
way with infinite pains and labour from the fire and smoke of burning
Weybridge towards London.

I saw an abandoned boat, very small and remote, drifting down-stream;
and throwing off the most of my sodden clothes, I went after it, gained
it, and so escaped out of that destruction. There were no oars in the
boat, but I contrived to paddle, as well as my parboiled hands would
allow, down the river towards Halliford and Walton, going very
tediously and continually looking behind me, as you may well
understand. I followed the river, because I considered that the water
gave me my best chance of escape should these giants return.

The hot water from the Martian’s overthrow drifted downstream with me,
so that for the best part of a mile I could see little of either bank.
Once, however, I made out a string of black figures hurrying across the
meadows from the direction of Weybridge. Halliford, it seemed, was
deserted, and several of the houses facing the river were on fire. It
was strange to see the place quite tranquil, quite desolate under the
hot blue sky, with the smoke and little threads of flame going straight
up into the heat of the afternoon. Never before had I seen houses
burning without the accompaniment of an obstructive crowd. A little
farther on the dry reeds up the bank were smoking and glowing, and a
line of fire inland was marching steadily across a late field of hay.

For a long time I drifted, so painful and weary was I after the
violence I had been through, and so intense the heat upon the water.
Then my fears got the better of me again, and I resumed my paddling.
The sun scorched my bare back. At last, as the bridge at Walton was
coming into sight round the bend, my fever and faintness overcame my
fears, and I landed on the Middlesex bank and lay down, deadly sick,
amid the long grass. I suppose the time was then about four or five
o’clock. I got up presently, walked perhaps half a mile without meeting
a soul, and then lay down again in the shadow of a hedge. I seem to
remember talking, wanderingly, to myself during that last spurt. I was
also very thirsty, and bitterly regretful I had drunk no more water. It
is a curious thing that I felt angry with my wife; I cannot account for
it, but my impotent desire to reach Leatherhead worried me excessively.

I do not clearly remember the arrival of the curate, so that probably I
dozed. I became aware of him as a seated figure in soot-smudged shirt
sleeves, and with his upturned, clean-shaven face staring at a faint
flickering that danced over the sky. The sky was what is called a
mackerel sky—rows and rows of faint down-plumes of cloud, just tinted
with the midsummer sunset.

I sat up, and at the rustle of my motion he looked at me quickly.

“Have you any water?” I asked abruptly.

He shook his head.

“You have been asking for water for the last hour,” he said.

For a moment we were silent, taking stock of each other. I dare say he
found me a strange enough figure, naked, save for my water-soaked
trousers and socks, scalded, and my face and shoulders blackened by the
smoke. His face was a fair weakness, his chin retreated, and his hair
lay in crisp, almost flaxen curls on his low forehead; his eyes were
rather large, pale blue, and blankly staring. He spoke abruptly,
looking vacantly away from me.

“What does it mean?” he said. “What do these things mean?”

I stared at him and made no answer.

He extended a thin white hand and spoke in almost a complaining tone.

“Why are these things permitted? What sins have we done? The morning
service was over, I was walking through the roads to clear my brain for
the afternoon, and then—fire, earthquake, death! As if it were Sodom
and Gomorrah! All our work undone, all the work—— What are these
Martians?”

“What are we?” I answered, clearing my throat.

He gripped his knees and turned to look at me again. For half a minute,
perhaps, he stared silently.

“I was walking through the roads to clear my brain,” he said. “And
suddenly—fire, earthquake, death!”

He relapsed into silence, with his chin now sunken almost to his knees.

Presently he began waving his hand.

“All the work—all the Sunday schools—What have we done—what has
Weybridge done? Everything gone—everything destroyed. The church! We
rebuilt it only three years ago. Gone! Swept out of existence! Why?”

Another pause, and he broke out again like one demented.

“The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever!” he shouted.

His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean finger in the direction of
Weybridge.

By this time I was beginning to take his measure. The tremendous
tragedy in which he had been involved—it was evident he was a fugitive
from Weybridge—had driven him to the very verge of his reason.

“Are we far from Sunbury?” I said, in a matter-of-fact tone.

“What are we to do?” he asked. “Are these creatures everywhere? Has the
earth been given over to them?”

“Are we far from Sunbury?”

“Only this morning I officiated at early celebration——”

“Things have changed,” I said, quietly. “You must keep your head. There
is still hope.”

“Hope!”

“Yes. Plentiful hope—for all this destruction!”

I began to explain my view of our position. He listened at first, but
as I went on the interest dawning in his eyes gave place to their
former stare, and his regard wandered from me.

“This must be the beginning of the end,” he said, interrupting me. “The
end! The great and terrible day of the Lord! When men shall call upon
the mountains and the rocks to fall upon them and hide them—hide them
from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne!”

I began to understand the position. I ceased my laboured reasoning,
struggled to my feet, and, standing over him, laid my hand on his
shoulder.

“Be a man!” said I. “You are scared out of your wits! What good is
religion if it collapses under calamity? Think of what earthquakes and
floods, wars and volcanoes, have done before to men! Did you think God
had exempted Weybridge? He is not an insurance agent.”

For a time he sat in blank silence.

“But how can we escape?” he asked, suddenly. “They are invulnerable,
they are pitiless.”

“Neither the one nor, perhaps, the other,” I answered. “And the
mightier they are the more sane and wary should we be. One of them was
killed yonder not three hours ago.”

“Killed!” he said, staring about him. “How can God’s ministers be
killed?”

“I saw it happen.” I proceeded to tell him. “We have chanced to come in
for the thick of it,” said I, “and that is all.”

“What is that flicker in the sky?” he asked abruptly.

I told him it was the heliograph signalling—that it was the sign of
human help and effort in the sky.

“We are in the midst of it,” I said, “quiet as it is. That flicker in
the sky tells of the gathering storm. Yonder, I take it are the
Martians, and Londonward, where those hills rise about Richmond and
Kingston and the trees give cover, earthworks are being thrown up and
guns are being placed. Presently the Martians will be coming this way
again.”

And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped me by a gesture.

“Listen!” he said.

From beyond the low hills across the water came the dull resonance of
distant guns and a remote weird crying. Then everything was still. A
cockchafer came droning over the hedge and past us. High in the west
the crescent moon hung faint and pale above the smoke of Weybridge and
Shepperton and the hot, still splendour of the sunset.

“We had better follow this path,” I said, “northward.”




XIV.
IN LONDON.


My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at Woking. He
was a medical student working for an imminent examination, and he heard
nothing of the arrival until Saturday morning. The morning papers on
Saturday contained, in addition to lengthy special articles on the
planet Mars, on life in the planets, and so forth, a brief and vaguely
worded telegram, all the more striking for its brevity.

The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd, had killed a number
of people with a quick-firing gun, so the story ran. The telegram
concluded with the words: “Formidable as they seem to be, the Martians
have not moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and, indeed,
seem incapable of doing so. Probably this is due to the relative
strength of the earth’s gravitational energy.” On that last text their
leader-writer expanded very comfortingly.

Of course all the students in the crammer’s biology class, to which my
brother went that day, were intensely interested, but there were no
signs of any unusual excitement in the streets. The afternoon papers
puffed scraps of news under big headlines. They had nothing to tell
beyond the movements of troops about the common, and the burning of the
pine woods between Woking and Weybridge, until eight. Then the _St.
James’s Gazette_, in an extra-special edition, announced the bare fact
of the interruption of telegraphic communication. This was thought to
be due to the falling of burning pine trees across the line. Nothing
more of the fighting was known that night, the night of my drive to
Leatherhead and back.

My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the description in
the papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from my house. He
made up his mind to run down that night to me, in order, as he says, to
see the Things before they were killed. He dispatched a telegram, which
never reached me, about four o’clock, and spent the evening at a music
hall.

In London, also, on Saturday night there was a thunderstorm, and my
brother reached Waterloo in a cab. On the platform from which the
midnight train usually starts he learned, after some waiting, that an
accident prevented trains from reaching Woking that night. The nature
of the accident he could not ascertain; indeed, the railway authorities
did not clearly know at that time. There was very little excitement in
the station, as the officials, failing to realise that anything further
than a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking junction had occurred, were
running the theatre trains which usually passed through Woking round by
Virginia Water or Guildford. They were busy making the necessary
arrangements to alter the route of the Southampton and Portsmouth
Sunday League excursions. A nocturnal newspaper reporter, mistaking my
brother for the traffic manager, to whom he bears a slight resemblance,
waylaid and tried to interview him. Few people, excepting the railway
officials, connected the breakdown with the Martians.

I have read, in another account of these events, that on Sunday morning
“all London was electrified by the news from Woking.” As a matter of
fact, there was nothing to justify that very extravagant phrase. Plenty
of Londoners did not hear of the Martians until the panic of Monday
morning. Those who did took some time to realise all that the hastily
worded telegrams in the Sunday papers conveyed. The majority of people
in London do not read Sunday papers.

The habit of personal security, moreover, is so deeply fixed in the
Londoner’s mind, and startling intelligence so much a matter of course
in the papers, that they could read without any personal tremors:
“About seven o’clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder,
and, moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have completely
wrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses, and massacred an
entire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment. No details are known. Maxims
have been absolutely useless against their armour; the field guns have
been disabled by them. Flying hussars have been galloping into
Chertsey. The Martians appear to be moving slowly towards Chertsey or
Windsor. Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and earthworks are
being thrown up to check the advance Londonward.” That was how the
_Sunday Sun_ put it, and a clever and remarkably prompt “handbook”
article in the _Referee_ compared the affair to a menagerie suddenly
let loose in a village.

No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armoured
Martians, and there was still a fixed idea that these monsters must be
sluggish: “crawling,” “creeping painfully”—such expressions occurred in
almost all the earlier reports. None of the telegrams could have been
written by an eyewitness of their advance. The Sunday papers printed
separate editions as further news came to hand, some even in default of
it. But there was practically nothing more to tell people until late in
the afternoon, when the authorities gave the press agencies the news in
their possession. It was stated that the people of Walton and
Weybridge, and all the district were pouring along the roads
Londonward, and that was all.

My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the morning,
still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous night. There he
heard allusions made to the invasion, and a special prayer for peace.
Coming out, he bought a _Referee_. He became alarmed at the news in
this, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if communication
were restored. The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, and innumerable
people walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely affected by the
strange intelligence that the newsvendors were disseminating. People
were interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed only on account of the local
residents. At the station he heard for the first time that the Windsor
and Chertsey lines were now interrupted. The porters told him that
several remarkable telegrams had been received in the morning from
Byfleet and Chertsey stations, but that these had abruptly ceased. My
brother could get very little precise detail out of them.

“There’s fighting going on about Weybridge” was the extent of their
information.

The train service was now very much disorganised. Quite a number of
people who had been expecting friends from places on the South-Western
network were standing about the station. One grey-headed old gentleman
came and abused the South-Western Company bitterly to my brother. “It
wants showing up,” he said.

One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
containing people who had gone out for a day’s boating and found the
locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air. A man in a blue and
white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.

“There’s hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts and
things, with boxes of valuables and all that,” he said. “They come from
Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say there’s been guns heard
at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have told them to
get off at once because the Martians are coming. We heard guns firing
at Hampton Court station, but we thought it was thunder. What the
dickens does it all mean? The Martians can’t get out of their pit, can
they?”

My brother could not tell him.

Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread to the
clients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday excursionists
began to return from all over the South-Western “lung”—Barnes,
Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth—at unnaturally early hours;
but not a soul had anything more than vague hearsay to tell of.
Everyone connected with the terminus seemed ill-tempered.

About five o’clock the gathering crowd in the station was immensely
excited by the opening of the line of communication, which is almost
invariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the South-Western
stations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing huge guns and
carriages crammed with soldiers. These were the guns that were brought
up from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston. There was an exchange
of pleasantries: “You’ll get eaten!” “We’re the beast-tamers!” and so
forth. A little while after that a squad of police came into the
station and began to clear the public off the platforms, and my brother
went out into the street again.

The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of Salvation
Army lassies came singing down Waterloo Road. On the bridge a number of
loafers were watching a curious brown scum that came drifting down the
stream in patches. The sun was just setting, and the Clock Tower and
the Houses of Parliament rose against one of the most peaceful skies it
is possible to imagine, a sky of gold, barred with long transverse
stripes of reddish-purple cloud. There was talk of a floating body. One
of the men there, a reservist he said he was, told my brother he had
seen the heliograph flickering in the west.

In Wellington Street my brother met a couple of sturdy roughs who had
just been rushed out of Fleet Street with still-wet newspapers and
staring placards. “Dreadful catastrophe!” they bawled one to the other
down Wellington Street. “Fighting at Weybridge! Full description!
Repulse of the Martians! London in Danger!” He had to give threepence
for a copy of that paper.

Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the full
power and terror of these monsters. He learned that they were not
merely a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that they were minds
swaying vast mechanical bodies; and that they could move swiftly and
smite with such power that even the mightiest guns could not stand
against them.

They were described as “vast spiderlike machines, nearly a hundred feet
high, capable of the speed of an express train, and able to shoot out a
beam of intense heat.” Masked batteries, chiefly of field guns, had
been planted in the country about Horsell Common, and especially
between the Woking district and London. Five of the machines had been
seen moving towards the Thames, and one, by a happy chance, had been
destroyed. In the other cases the shells had missed, and the batteries
had been at once annihilated by the Heat-Rays. Heavy losses of soldiers
were mentioned, but the tone of the dispatch was optimistic.

The Martians had been repulsed; they were not invulnerable. They had
retreated to their triangle of cylinders again, in the circle about
Woking. Signallers with heliographs were pushing forward upon them from
all sides. Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor, Portsmouth,
Aldershot, Woolwich—even from the north; among others, long wire-guns
of ninety-five tons from Woolwich. Altogether one hundred and sixteen
were in position or being hastily placed, chiefly covering London.
Never before in England had there been such a vast or rapid
concentration of military material.

Any further cylinders that fell, it was hoped, could be destroyed at
once by high explosives, which were being rapidly manufactured and
distributed. No doubt, ran the report, the situation was of the
strangest and gravest description, but the public was exhorted to avoid
and discourage panic. No doubt the Martians were strange and terrible
in the extreme, but at the outside there could not be more than twenty
of them against our millions.

The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of the cylinders,
that at the outside there could not be more than five in each
cylinder—fifteen altogether. And one at least was disposed of—perhaps
more. The public would be fairly warned of the approach of danger, and
elaborate measures were being taken for the protection of the people in
the threatened southwestern suburbs. And so, with reiterated assurances
of the safety of London and the ability of the authorities to cope with
the difficulty, this quasi-proclamation closed.

This was printed in enormous type on paper so fresh that it was still
wet, and there had been no time to add a word of comment. It was
curious, my brother said, to see how ruthlessly the usual contents of
the paper had been hacked and taken out to give this place.

All down Wellington Street people could be seen fluttering out the pink
sheets and reading, and the Strand was suddenly noisy with the voices
of an army of hawkers following these pioneers. Men came scrambling off
buses to secure copies. Certainly this news excited people intensely,
whatever their previous apathy. The shutters of a map shop in the
Strand were being taken down, my brother said, and a man in his Sunday
raiment, lemon-yellow gloves even, was visible inside the window
hastily fastening maps of Surrey to the glass.

Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the paper in his hand,
my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey. There was a man
with his wife and two boys and some articles of furniture in a cart
such as greengrocers use. He was driving from the direction of
Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five or
six respectable-looking people in it, and some boxes and bundles. The
faces of these people were haggard, and their entire appearance
contrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best appearance of the people
on the omnibuses. People in fashionable clothing peeped at them out of
cabs. They stopped at the Square as if undecided which way to take, and
finally turned eastward along the Strand. Some way behind these came a
man in workday clothes, riding one of those old-fashioned tricycles
with a small front wheel. He was dirty and white in the face.

My brother turned down towards Victoria, and met a number of such
people. He had a vague idea that he might see something of me. He
noticed an unusual number of police regulating the traffic. Some of the
refugees were exchanging news with the people on the omnibuses. One was
professing to have seen the Martians. “Boilers on stilts, I tell you,
striding along like men.” Most of them were excited and animated by
their strange experience.

Beyond Victoria the public-houses were doing a lively trade with these
arrivals. At all the street corners groups of people were reading
papers, talking excitedly, or staring at these unusual Sunday visitors.
They seemed to increase as night drew on, until at last the roads, my
brother said, were like Epsom High Street on a Derby Day. My brother
addressed several of these fugitives and got unsatisfactory answers
from most.

None of them could tell him any news of Woking except one man, who
assured him that Woking had been entirely destroyed on the previous
night.

“I come from Byfleet,” he said; “a man on a bicycle came through the
place in the early morning, and ran from door to door warning us to
come away. Then came soldiers. We went out to look, and there were
clouds of smoke to the south—nothing but smoke, and not a soul coming
that way. Then we heard the guns at Chertsey, and folks coming from
Weybridge. So I’ve locked up my house and come on.”

At that time there was a strong feeling in the streets that the
authorities were to blame for their incapacity to dispose of the
invaders without all this inconvenience.

About eight o’clock a noise of heavy firing was distinctly audible all
over the south of London. My brother could not hear it for the traffic
in the main thoroughfares, but by striking through the quiet back
streets to the river he was able to distinguish it quite plainly.

He walked from Westminster to his apartments near Regent’s Park, about
two. He was now very anxious on my account, and disturbed at the
evident magnitude of the trouble. His mind was inclined to run, even as
mine had run on Saturday, on military details. He thought of all those
silent, expectant guns, of the suddenly nomadic countryside; he tried
to imagine “boilers on stilts” a hundred feet high.

There were one or two cartloads of refugees passing along Oxford
Street, and several in the Marylebone Road, but so slowly was the news
spreading that Regent Street and Portland Place were full of their
usual Sunday-night promenaders, albeit they talked in groups, and along
the edge of Regent’s Park there were as many silent couples “walking
out” together under the scattered gas lamps as ever there had been. The
night was warm and still, and a little oppressive; the sound of guns
continued intermittently, and after midnight there seemed to be sheet
lightning in the south.

He read and re-read the paper, fearing the worst had happened to me. He
was restless, and after supper prowled out again aimlessly. He returned
and tried in vain to divert his attention to his examination notes. He
went to bed a little after midnight, and was awakened from lurid dreams
in the small hours of Monday by the sound of door knockers, feet
running in the street, distant drumming, and a clamour of bells. Red
reflections danced on the ceiling. For a moment he lay astonished,
wondering whether day had come or the world gone mad. Then he jumped
out of bed and ran to the window.

His room was an attic and as he thrust his head out, up and down the
street there were a dozen echoes to the noise of his window sash, and
heads in every kind of night disarray appeared. Enquiries were being
shouted. “They are coming!” bawled a policeman, hammering at the door;
“the Martians are coming!” and hurried to the next door.

The sound of drumming and trumpeting came from the Albany Street
Barracks, and every church within earshot was hard at work killing
sleep with a vehement disorderly tocsin. There was a noise of doors
opening, and window after window in the houses opposite flashed from
darkness into yellow illumination.

Up the street came galloping a closed carriage, bursting abruptly into
noise at the corner, rising to a clattering climax under the window,
and dying away slowly in the distance. Close on the rear of this came a
couple of cabs, the forerunners of a long procession of flying
vehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm station, where the
North-Western special trains were loading up, instead of coming down
the gradient into Euston.

For a long time my brother stared out of the window in blank
astonishment, watching the policemen hammering at door after door, and
delivering their incomprehensible message. Then the door behind him
opened, and the man who lodged across the landing came in, dressed only
in shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces loose about his waist, his
hair disordered from his pillow.

“What the devil is it?” he asked. “A fire? What a devil of a row!”

They both craned their heads out of the window, straining to hear what
the policemen were shouting. People were coming out of the side
streets, and standing in groups at the corners talking.

“What the devil is it all about?” said my brother’s fellow lodger.

My brother answered him vaguely and began to dress, running with each
garment to the window in order to miss nothing of the growing
excitement. And presently men selling unnaturally early newspapers came
bawling into the street:

“London in danger of suffocation! The Kingston and Richmond defences
forced! Fearful massacres in the Thames Valley!”

And all about him—in the rooms below, in the houses on each side and
across the road, and behind in the Park Terraces and in the hundred
other streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne Park
district and St. Pancras, and westward and northward in Kilburn and St.
John’s Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch and Highbury and
Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the vastness of London
from Ealing to East Ham—people were rubbing their eyes, and opening
windows to stare out and ask aimless questions, dressing hastily as the
first breath of the coming storm of Fear blew through the streets. It
was the dawn of the great panic. London, which had gone to bed on
Sunday night oblivious and inert, was awakened, in the small hours of
Monday morning, to a vivid sense of danger.

Unable from his window to learn what was happening, my brother went
down and out into the street, just as the sky between the parapets of
the houses grew pink with the early dawn. The flying people on foot and
in vehicles grew more numerous every moment. “Black Smoke!” he heard
people crying, and again “Black Smoke!” The contagion of such a
unanimous fear was inevitable. As my brother hesitated on the
door-step, he saw another newsvendor approaching, and got a paper
forthwith. The man was running away with the rest, and selling his
papers for a shilling each as he ran—a grotesque mingling of profit and
panic.

And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic dispatch of the
Commander-in-Chief:

“The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds of a black and
poisonous vapour by means of rockets. They have smothered our
batteries, destroyed Richmond, Kingston, and Wimbledon, and are
advancing slowly towards London, destroying everything on the way. It
is impossible to stop them. There is no safety from the Black Smoke but
in instant flight.”


That was all, but it was enough. The whole population of the great
six-million city was stirring, slipping, running; presently it would be
pouring _en masse_ northward.

“Black Smoke!” the voices cried. “Fire!”

The bells of the neighbouring church made a jangling tumult, a cart
carelessly driven smashed, amid shrieks and curses, against the water
trough up the street. Sickly yellow lights went to and fro in the
houses, and some of the passing cabs flaunted unextinguished lamps. And
overhead the dawn was growing brighter, clear and steady and calm.

He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and up and down
stairs behind him. His landlady came to the door, loosely wrapped in
dressing gown and shawl; her husband followed, ejaculating.

As my brother began to realise the import of all these things, he
turned hastily to his own room, put all his available money—some ten
pounds altogether—into his pockets, and went out again into the
streets.




XV.
WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY.


It was while the curate had sat and talked so wildly to me under the
hedge in the flat meadows near Halliford, and while my brother was
watching the fugitives stream over Westminster Bridge, that the
Martians had resumed the offensive. So far as one can ascertain from
the conflicting accounts that have been put forth, the majority of them
remained busied with preparations in the Horsell pit until nine that
night, hurrying on some operation that disengaged huge volumes of green
smoke.

But three certainly came out about eight o’clock and, advancing slowly
and cautiously, made their way through Byfleet and Pyrford towards
Ripley and Weybridge, and so came in sight of the expectant batteries
against the setting sun. These Martians did not advance in a body, but
in a line, each perhaps a mile and a half from his nearest fellow. They
communicated with one another by means of sirenlike howls, running up
and down the scale from one note to another.

It was this howling and firing of the guns at Ripley and St. George’s
Hill that we had heard at Upper Halliford. The Ripley gunners,
unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never to have been placed in
such a position, fired one wild, premature, ineffectual volley, and
bolted on horse and foot through the deserted village, while the
Martian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked serenely over their guns,
stepped gingerly among them, passed in front of them, and so came
unexpectedly upon the guns in Painshill Park, which he destroyed.

The St. George’s Hill men, however, were better led or of a better
mettle. Hidden by a pine wood as they were, they seem to have been
quite unsuspected by the Martian nearest to them. They laid their guns
as deliberately as if they had been on parade, and fired at about a
thousand yards’ range.

The shells flashed all round him, and he was seen to advance a few
paces, stagger, and go down. Everybody yelled together, and the guns
were reloaded in frantic haste. The overthrown Martian set up a
prolonged ululation, and immediately a second glittering giant,
answering him, appeared over the trees to the south. It would seem that
a leg of the tripod had been smashed by one of the shells. The whole of
the second volley flew wide of the Martian on the ground, and,
simultaneously, both his companions brought their Heat-Rays to bear on
the battery. The ammunition blew up, the pine trees all about the guns
flashed into fire, and only one or two of the men who were already
running over the crest of the hill escaped.

After this it would seem that the three took counsel together and
halted, and the scouts who were watching them report that they remained
absolutely stationary for the next half hour. The Martian who had been
overthrown crawled tediously out of his hood, a small brown figure,
oddly suggestive from that distance of a speck of blight, and
apparently engaged in the repair of his support. About nine he had
finished, for his cowl was then seen above the trees again.

It was a few minutes past nine that night when these three sentinels
were joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick black tube. A
similar tube was handed to each of the three, and the seven proceeded
to distribute themselves at equal distances along a curved line between
St. George’s Hill, Weybridge, and the village of Send, southwest of
Ripley.

A dozen rockets sprang out of the hills before them so soon as they
began to move, and warned the waiting batteries about Ditton and Esher.
At the same time four of their fighting machines, similarly armed with
tubes, crossed the river, and two of them, black against the western
sky, came into sight of myself and the curate as we hurried wearily and
painfully along the road that runs northward out of Halliford. They
moved, as it seemed to us, upon a cloud, for a milky mist covered the
fields and rose to a third of their height.

At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and began
running; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian, and I turned
aside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broad
ditch by the side of the road. He looked back, saw what I was doing,
and turned to join me.

The two halted, the nearer to us standing and facing Sunbury, the
remoter being a grey indistinctness towards the evening star, away
towards Staines.

The occasional howling of the Martians had ceased; they took up their
positions in the huge crescent about their cylinders in absolute
silence. It was a crescent with twelve miles between its horns. Never
since the devising of gunpowder was the beginning of a battle so still.
To us and to an observer about Ripley it would have had precisely the
same effect—the Martians seemed in solitary possession of the darkling
night, lit only as it was by the slender moon, the stars, the afterglow
of the daylight, and the ruddy glare from St. George’s Hill and the
woods of Painshill.

But facing that crescent everywhere—at Staines, Hounslow, Ditton,
Esher, Ockham, behind hills and woods south of the river, and across
the flat grass meadows to the north of it, wherever a cluster of trees
or village houses gave sufficient cover—the guns were waiting. The
signal rockets burst and rained their sparks through the night and
vanished, and the spirit of all those watching batteries rose to a
tense expectation. The Martians had but to advance into the line of
fire, and instantly those motionless black forms of men, those guns
glittering so darkly in the early night, would explode into a
thunderous fury of battle.

No doubt the thought that was uppermost in a thousand of those vigilant
minds, even as it was uppermost in mine, was the riddle—how much they
understood of us. Did they grasp that we in our millions were
organized, disciplined, working together? Or did they interpret our
spurts of fire, the sudden stinging of our shells, our steady
investment of their encampment, as we should the furious unanimity of
onslaught in a disturbed hive of bees? Did they dream they might
exterminate us? (At that time no one knew what food they needed.) A
hundred such questions struggled together in my mind as I watched that
vast sentinel shape. And in the back of my mind was the sense of all
the huge unknown and hidden forces Londonward. Had they prepared
pitfalls? Were the powder mills at Hounslow ready as a snare? Would the
Londoners have the heart and courage to make a greater Moscow of their
mighty province of houses?

Then, after an interminable time, as it seemed to us, crouching and
peering through the hedge, came a sound like the distant concussion of
a gun. Another nearer, and then another. And then the Martian beside us
raised his tube on high and discharged it, gunwise, with a heavy report
that made the ground heave. The one towards Staines answered him. There
was no flash, no smoke, simply that loaded detonation.

I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following one another that
I so far forgot my personal safety and my scalded hands as to clamber
up into the hedge and stare towards Sunbury. As I did so a second
report followed, and a big projectile hurtled overhead towards
Hounslow. I expected at least to see smoke or fire, or some such
evidence of its work. But all I saw was the deep blue sky above, with
one solitary star, and the white mist spreading wide and low beneath.
And there had been no crash, no answering explosion. The silence was
restored; the minute lengthened to three.

“What has happened?” said the curate, standing up beside me.

“Heaven knows!” said I.

A bat flickered by and vanished. A distant tumult of shouting began and
ceased. I looked again at the Martian, and saw he was now moving
eastward along the riverbank, with a swift, rolling motion.

Every moment I expected the fire of some hidden battery to spring upon
him; but the evening calm was unbroken. The figure of the Martian grew
smaller as he receded, and presently the mist and the gathering night
had swallowed him up. By a common impulse we clambered higher. Towards
Sunbury was a dark appearance, as though a conical hill had suddenly
come into being there, hiding our view of the farther country; and
then, remoter across the river, over Walton, we saw another such
summit. These hill-like forms grew lower and broader even as we stared.

Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and there I perceived a
third of these cloudy black kopjes had risen.

Everything had suddenly become very still. Far away to the southeast,
marking the quiet, we heard the Martians hooting to one another, and
then the air quivered again with the distant thud of their guns. But
the earthly artillery made no reply.

Now at the time we could not understand these things, but later I was
to learn the meaning of these ominous kopjes that gathered in the
twilight. Each of the Martians, standing in the great crescent I have
described, had discharged, by means of the gunlike tube he carried, a
huge canister over whatever hill, copse, cluster of houses, or other
possible cover for guns, chanced to be in front of him. Some fired only
one of these, some two—as in the case of the one we had seen; the one
at Ripley is said to have discharged no fewer than five at that time.
These canisters smashed on striking the ground—they did not explode—and
incontinently disengaged an enormous volume of heavy, inky vapour,
coiling and pouring upward in a huge and ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseous
hill that sank and spread itself slowly over the surrounding country.
And the touch of that vapour, the inhaling of its pungent wisps, was
death to all that breathes.

It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the densest smoke, so that,
after the first tumultuous uprush and outflow of its impact, it sank
down through the air and poured over the ground in a manner rather
liquid than gaseous, abandoning the hills, and streaming into the
valleys and ditches and watercourses even as I have heard the
carbonic-acid gas that pours from volcanic clefts is wont to do. And
where it came upon water some chemical action occurred, and the surface
would be instantly covered with a powdery scum that sank slowly and
made way for more. The scum was absolutely insoluble, and it is a
strange thing, seeing the instant effect of the gas, that one could
drink without hurt the water from which it had been strained. The
vapour did not diffuse as a true gas would do. It hung together in
banks, flowing sluggishly down the slope of the land and driving
reluctantly before the wind, and very slowly it combined with the mist
and moisture of the air, and sank to the earth in the form of dust.
Save that an unknown element giving a group of four lines in the blue
of the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant of the
nature of this substance.

Once the tumultuous upheaval of its dispersion was over, the black
smoke clung so closely to the ground, even before its precipitation,
that fifty feet up in the air, on the roofs and upper stories of high
houses and on great trees, there was a chance of escaping its poison
altogether, as was proved even that night at Street Cobham and Ditton.

The man who escaped at the former place tells a wonderful story of the
strangeness of its coiling flow, and how he looked down from the church
spire and saw the houses of the village rising like ghosts out of its
inky nothingness. For a day and a half he remained there, weary,
starving and sun-scorched, the earth under the blue sky and against the
prospect of the distant hills a velvet-black expanse, with red roofs,
green trees, and, later, black-veiled shrubs and gates, barns,
outhouses, and walls, rising here and there into the sunlight.

But that was at Street Cobham, where the black vapour was allowed to
remain until it sank of its own accord into the ground. As a rule the
Martians, when it had served its purpose, cleared the air of it again
by wading into it and directing a jet of steam upon it.

This they did with the vapour banks near us, as we saw in the starlight
from the window of a deserted house at Upper Halliford, whither we had
returned. From there we could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill and
Kingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven the windows rattled,
and we heard the sound of the huge siege guns that had been put in
position there. These continued intermittently for the space of a
quarter of an hour, sending chance shots at the invisible Martians at
Hampton and Ditton, and then the pale beams of the electric light
vanished, and were replaced by a bright red glow.

Then the fourth cylinder fell—a brilliant green meteor—as I learned
afterwards, in Bushey Park. Before the guns on the Richmond and
Kingston line of hills began, there was a fitful cannonade far away in
the southwest, due, I believe, to guns being fired haphazard before the
black vapour could overwhelm the gunners.

So, setting about it as methodically as men might smoke out a wasps’
nest, the Martians spread this strange stifling vapour over the
Londonward country. The horns of the crescent slowly moved apart, until
at last they formed a line from Hanwell to Coombe and Malden. All night
through their destructive tubes advanced. Never once, after the Martian
at St. George’s Hill was brought down, did they give the artillery the
ghost of a chance against them. Wherever there was a possibility of
guns being laid for them unseen, a fresh canister of the black vapour
was discharged, and where the guns were openly displayed the Heat-Ray
was brought to bear.

By midnight the blazing trees along the slopes of Richmond Park and the
glare of Kingston Hill threw their light upon a network of black smoke,
blotting out the whole valley of the Thames and extending as far as the
eye could reach. And through this two Martians slowly waded, and turned
their hissing steam jets this way and that.

They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night, either because they had
but a limited supply of material for its production or because they did
not wish to destroy the country but only to crush and overawe the
opposition they had aroused. In the latter aim they certainly
succeeded. Sunday night was the end of the organised opposition to
their movements. After that no body of men would stand against them, so
hopeless was the enterprise. Even the crews of the torpedo-boats and
destroyers that had brought their quick-firers up the Thames refused to
stop, mutinied, and went down again. The only offensive operation men
ventured upon after that night was the preparation of mines and
pitfalls, and even in that their energies were frantic and spasmodic.

One has to imagine, as well as one may, the fate of those batteries
towards Esher, waiting so tensely in the twilight. Survivors there were
none. One may picture the orderly expectation, the officers alert and
watchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition piled to hand, the limber
gunners with their horses and waggons, the groups of civilian
spectators standing as near as they were permitted, the evening
stillness, the ambulances and hospital tents with the burned and
wounded from Weybridge; then the dull resonance of the shots the
Martians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees and
houses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields.

One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the attention, the swiftly
spreading coils and bellyings of that blackness advancing headlong,
towering heavenward, turning the twilight to a palpable darkness, a
strange and horrible antagonist of vapour striding upon its victims,
men and horses near it seen dimly, running, shrieking, falling
headlong, shouts of dismay, the guns suddenly abandoned, men choking
and writhing on the ground, and the swift broadening-out of the opaque
cone of smoke. And then night and extinction—nothing but a silent mass
of impenetrable vapour hiding its dead.

Before dawn the black vapour was pouring through the streets of
Richmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with a
last expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the necessity
of flight.




XVI.
THE EXODUS FROM LONDON.


So you understand the roaring wave of fear that swept through the
greatest city in the world just as Monday was dawning—the stream of
flight rising swiftly to a torrent, lashing in a foaming tumult round
the railway stations, banked up into a horrible struggle about the
shipping in the Thames, and hurrying by every available channel
northward and eastward. By ten o’clock the police organisation, and by
midday even the railway organisations, were losing coherency, losing
shape and efficiency, guttering, softening, running at last in that
swift liquefaction of the social body.

All the railway lines north of the Thames and the South-Eastern people
at Cannon Street had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and trains were
being filled. People were fighting savagely for standing-room in the
carriages even at two o’clock. By three, people were being trampled and
crushed even in Bishopsgate Street, a couple of hundred yards or more
from Liverpool Street station; revolvers were fired, people stabbed,
and the policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, exhausted
and infuriated, were breaking the heads of the people they were called
out to protect.

And as the day advanced and the engine drivers and stokers refused to
return to London, the pressure of the flight drove the people in an
ever-thickening multitude away from the stations and along the
northward-running roads. By midday a Martian had been seen at Barnes,
and a cloud of slowly sinking black vapour drove along the Thames and
across the flats of Lambeth, cutting off all escape over the bridges in
its sluggish advance. Another bank drove over Ealing, and surrounded a
little island of survivors on Castle Hill, alive, but unable to escape.

After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train at Chalk
Farm—the engines of the trains that had loaded in the goods yard there
_ploughed_ through shrieking people, and a dozen stalwart men fought to
keep the crowd from crushing the driver against his furnace—my brother
emerged upon the Chalk Farm road, dodged across through a hurrying
swarm of vehicles, and had the luck to be foremost in the sack of a
cycle shop. The front tire of the machine he got was punctured in
dragging it through the window, but he got up and off, notwithstanding,
with no further injury than a cut wrist. The steep foot of Haverstock
Hill was impassable owing to several overturned horses, and my brother
struck into Belsize Road.

So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, skirting the Edgware Road,
reached Edgware about seven, fasting and wearied, but well ahead of the
crowd. Along the road people were standing in the roadway, curious,
wondering. He was passed by a number of cyclists, some horsemen, and
two motor cars. A mile from Edgware the rim of the wheel broke, and the
machine became unridable. He left it by the roadside and trudged
through the village. There were shops half opened in the main street of
the place, and people crowded on the pavement and in the doorways and
windows, staring astonished at this extraordinary procession of
fugitives that was beginning. He succeeded in getting some food at an
inn.

For a time he remained in Edgware not knowing what next to do. The
flying people increased in number. Many of them, like my brother,
seemed inclined to loiter in the place. There was no fresh news of the
invaders from Mars.

At that time the road was crowded, but as yet far from congested. Most
of the fugitives at that hour were mounted on cycles, but there were
soon motor cars, hansom cabs, and carriages hurrying along, and the
dust hung in heavy clouds along the road to St. Albans.

It was perhaps a vague idea of making his way to Chelmsford, where some
friends of his lived, that at last induced my brother to strike into a
quiet lane running eastward. Presently he came upon a stile, and,
crossing it, followed a footpath northeastward. He passed near several
farmhouses and some little places whose names he did not learn. He saw
few fugitives until, in a grass lane towards High Barnet, he happened
upon two ladies who became his fellow travellers. He came upon them
just in time to save them.

He heard their screams, and, hurrying round the corner, saw a couple of
men struggling to drag them out of the little pony-chaise in which they
had been driving, while a third with difficulty held the frightened
pony’s head. One of the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, was
simply screaming; the other, a dark, slender figure, slashed at the man
who gripped her arm with a whip she held in her disengaged hand.

My brother immediately grasped the situation, shouted, and hurried
towards the struggle. One of the men desisted and turned towards him,
and my brother, realising from his antagonist’s face that a fight was
unavoidable, and being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith and
sent him down against the wheel of the chaise.

It was no time for pugilistic chivalry and my brother laid him quiet
with a kick, and gripped the collar of the man who pulled at the
slender lady’s arm. He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip stung
across his face, a third antagonist struck him between the eyes, and
the man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the lane in the
direction from which he had come.

Partly stunned, he found himself facing the man who had held the
horse’s head, and became aware of the chaise receding from him down the
lane, swaying from side to side, and with the women in it looking back.
The man before him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he stopped him
with a blow in the face. Then, realising that he was deserted, he
dodged round and made off down the lane after the chaise, with the
sturdy man close behind him, and the fugitive, who had turned now,
following remotely.

Suddenly he stumbled and fell; his immediate pursuer went headlong, and
he rose to his feet to find himself with a couple of antagonists again.
He would have had little chance against them had not the slender lady
very pluckily pulled up and returned to his help. It seems she had had
a revolver all this time, but it had been under the seat when she and
her companion were attacked. She fired at six yards’ distance, narrowly
missing my brother. The less courageous of the robbers made off, and
his companion followed him, cursing his cowardice. They both stopped in
sight down the lane, where the third man lay insensible.

“Take this!” said the slender lady, and she gave my brother her
revolver.

“Go back to the chaise,” said my brother, wiping the blood from his
split lip.

She turned without a word—they were both panting—and they went back to
where the lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened pony.

The robbers had evidently had enough of it. When my brother looked
again they were retreating.

“I’ll sit here,” said my brother, “if I may”; and he got upon the empty
front seat. The lady looked over her shoulder.

“Give me the reins,” she said, and laid the whip along the pony’s side.
In another moment a bend in the road hid the three men from my
brother’s eyes.

So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found himself, panting, with a cut
mouth, a bruised jaw, and bloodstained knuckles, driving along an
unknown lane with these two women.

He learned they were the wife and the younger sister of a surgeon
living at Stanmore, who had come in the small hours from a dangerous
case at Pinner, and heard at some railway station on his way of the
Martian advance. He had hurried home, roused the women—their servant
had left them two days before—packed some provisions, put his revolver
under the seat—luckily for my brother—and told them to drive on to
Edgware, with the idea of getting a train there. He stopped behind to
tell the neighbours. He would overtake them, he said, at about half
past four in the morning, and now it was nearly nine and they had seen
nothing of him. They could not stop in Edgware because of the growing
traffic through the place, and so they had come into this side lane.

That was the story they told my brother in fragments when presently
they stopped again, nearer to New Barnet. He promised to stay with
them, at least until they could determine what to do, or until the
missing man arrived, and professed to be an expert shot with the
revolver—a weapon strange to him—in order to give them confidence.

They made a sort of encampment by the wayside, and the pony became
happy in the hedge. He told them of his own escape out of London, and
all that he knew of these Martians and their ways. The sun crept higher
in the sky, and after a time their talk died out and gave place to an
uneasy state of anticipation. Several wayfarers came along the lane,
and of these my brother gathered such news as he could. Every broken
answer he had deepened his impression of the great disaster that had
come on humanity, deepened his persuasion of the immediate necessity
for prosecuting this flight. He urged the matter upon them.

“We have money,” said the slender woman, and hesitated.

Her eyes met my brother’s, and her hesitation ended.

“So have I,” said my brother.

She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold, besides a
five-pound note, and suggested that with that they might get upon a
train at St. Albans or New Barnet. My brother thought that was
hopeless, seeing the fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the trains,
and broached his own idea of striking across Essex towards Harwich and
thence escaping from the country altogether.

Mrs. Elphinstone—that was the name of the woman in white—would listen
to no reasoning, and kept calling upon “George”; but her sister-in-law
was astonishingly quiet and deliberate, and at last agreed to my
brother’s suggestion. So, designing to cross the Great North Road, they
went on towards Barnet, my brother leading the pony to save it as much
as possible. As the sun crept up the sky the day became excessively
hot, and under foot a thick, whitish sand grew burning and blinding, so
that they travelled only very slowly. The hedges were grey with dust.
And as they advanced towards Barnet a tumultuous murmuring grew
stronger.

They began to meet more people. For the most part these were staring
before them, murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard, unclean.
One man in evening dress passed them on foot, his eyes on the ground.
They heard his voice, and, looking back at him, saw one hand clutched
in his hair and the other beating invisible things. His paroxysm of
rage over, he went on his way without once looking back.

As my brother’s party went on towards the crossroads to the south of
Barnet they saw a woman approaching the road across some fields on
their left, carrying a child and with two other children; and then
passed a man in dirty black, with a thick stick in one hand and a small
portmanteau in the other. Then round the corner of the lane, from
between the villas that guarded it at its confluence with the high
road, came a little cart drawn by a sweating black pony and driven by a
sallow youth in a bowler hat, grey with dust. There were three girls,
East End factory girls, and a couple of little children crowded in the
cart.

“This’ll tike us rahnd Edgware?” asked the driver, wild-eyed,
white-faced; and when my brother told him it would if he turned to the
left, he whipped up at once without the formality of thanks.

My brother noticed a pale grey smoke or haze rising among the houses in
front of them, and veiling the white façade of a terrace beyond the
road that appeared between the backs of the villas. Mrs. Elphinstone
suddenly cried out at a number of tongues of smoky red flame leaping up
above the houses in front of them against the hot, blue sky. The
tumultuous noise resolved itself now into the disorderly mingling of
many voices, the gride of many wheels, the creaking of waggons, and the
staccato of hoofs. The lane came round sharply not fifty yards from the
crossroads.

“Good heavens!” cried Mrs. Elphinstone. “What is this you are driving
us into?”

My brother stopped.

For the main road was a boiling stream of people, a torrent of human
beings rushing northward, one pressing on another. A great bank of
dust, white and luminous in the blaze of the sun, made everything
within twenty feet of the ground grey and indistinct and was
perpetually renewed by the hurrying feet of a dense crowd of horses and
of men and women on foot, and by the wheels of vehicles of every
description.

“Way!” my brother heard voices crying. “Make way!”

It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to approach the meeting
point of the lane and road; the crowd roared like a fire, and the dust
was hot and pungent. And, indeed, a little way up the road a villa was
burning and sending rolling masses of black smoke across the road to
add to the confusion.

Two men came past them. Then a dirty woman, carrying a heavy bundle and
weeping. A lost retriever dog, with hanging tongue, circled dubiously
round them, scared and wretched, and fled at my brother’s threat.

So much as they could see of the road Londonward between the houses to
the right was a tumultuous stream of dirty, hurrying people, pent in
between the villas on either side; the black heads, the crowded forms,
grew into distinctness as they rushed towards the corner, hurried past,
and merged their individuality again in a receding multitude that was
swallowed up at last in a cloud of dust.

“Go on! Go on!” cried the voices. “Way! Way!”

One man’s hands pressed on the back of another. My brother stood at the
pony’s head. Irresistibly attracted, he advanced slowly, pace by pace,
down the lane.

Edgware had been a scene of confusion, Chalk Farm a riotous tumult, but
this was a whole population in movement. It is hard to imagine that
host. It had no character of its own. The figures poured out past the
corner, and receded with their backs to the group in the lane. Along
the margin came those who were on foot threatened by the wheels,
stumbling in the ditches, blundering into one another.

The carts and carriages crowded close upon one another, making little
way for those swifter and more impatient vehicles that darted forward
every now and then when an opportunity showed itself of doing so,
sending the people scattering against the fences and gates of the
villas.

“Push on!” was the cry. “Push on! They are coming!”

In one cart stood a blind man in the uniform of the Salvation Army,
gesticulating with his crooked fingers and bawling, “Eternity!
Eternity!” His voice was hoarse and very loud so that my brother could
hear him long after he was lost to sight in the dust. Some of the
people who crowded in the carts whipped stupidly at their horses and
quarrelled with other drivers; some sat motionless, staring at nothing
with miserable eyes; some gnawed their hands with thirst, or lay
prostrate in the bottoms of their conveyances. The horses’ bits were
covered with foam, their eyes bloodshot.

There were cabs, carriages, shop-carts, waggons, beyond counting; a
mail cart, a road-cleaner’s cart marked “Vestry of St. Pancras,” a huge
timber waggon crowded with roughs. A brewer’s dray rumbled by with its
two near wheels splashed with fresh blood.

“Clear the way!” cried the voices. “Clear the way!”

“Eter-nity! Eter-nity!” came echoing down the road.

There were sad, haggard women tramping by, well dressed, with children
that cried and stumbled, their dainty clothes smothered in dust, their
weary faces smeared with tears. With many of these came men, sometimes
helpful, sometimes lowering and savage. Fighting side by side with them
pushed some weary street outcast in faded black rags, wide-eyed,
loud-voiced, and foul-mouthed. There were sturdy workmen thrusting
their way along, wretched, unkempt men, clothed like clerks or shopmen,
struggling spasmodically; a wounded soldier my brother noticed, men
dressed in the clothes of railway porters, one wretched creature in a
nightshirt with a coat thrown over it.

But varied as its composition was, certain things all that host had in
common. There were fear and pain on their faces, and fear behind them.
A tumult up the road, a quarrel for a place in a waggon, sent the whole
host of them quickening their pace; even a man so scared and broken
that his knees bent under him was galvanised for a moment into renewed
activity. The heat and dust had already been at work upon this
multitude. Their skins were dry, their lips black and cracked. They
were all thirsty, weary, and footsore. And amid the various cries one
heard disputes, reproaches, groans of weariness and fatigue; the voices
of most of them were hoarse and weak. Through it all ran a refrain:

“Way! Way! The Martians are coming!”

Few stopped and came aside from that flood. The lane opened slantingly
into the main road with a narrow opening, and had a delusive appearance
of coming from the direction of London. Yet a kind of eddy of people
drove into its mouth; weaklings elbowed out of the stream, who for the
most part rested but a moment before plunging into it again. A little
way down the lane, with two friends bending over him, lay a man with a
bare leg, wrapped about with bloody rags. He was a lucky man to have
friends.

A little old man, with a grey military moustache and a filthy black
frock coat, limped out and sat down beside the trap, removed his
boot—his sock was blood-stained—shook out a pebble, and hobbled on
again; and then a little girl of eight or nine, all alone, threw
herself under the hedge close by my brother, weeping.

“I can’t go on! I can’t go on!”

My brother woke from his torpor of astonishment and lifted her up,
speaking gently to her, and carried her to Miss Elphinstone. So soon as
my brother touched her she became quite still, as if frightened.

“Ellen!” shrieked a woman in the crowd, with tears in her
voice—“Ellen!” And the child suddenly darted away from my brother,
crying “Mother!”

“They are coming,” said a man on horseback, riding past along the lane.

“Out of the way, there!” bawled a coachman, towering high; and my
brother saw a closed carriage turning into the lane.

The people crushed back on one another to avoid the horse. My brother
pushed the pony and chaise back into the hedge, and the man drove by
and stopped at the turn of the way. It was a carriage, with a pole for
a pair of horses, but only one was in the traces. My brother saw dimly
through the dust that two men lifted out something on a white stretcher
and put it gently on the grass beneath the privet hedge.

One of the men came running to my brother.

“Where is there any water?” he said. “He is dying fast, and very
thirsty. It is Lord Garrick.”

“Lord Garrick!” said my brother; “the Chief Justice?”

“The water?” he said.

“There may be a tap,” said my brother, “in some of the houses. We have
no water. I dare not leave my people.”

The man pushed against the crowd towards the gate of the corner house.

“Go on!” said the people, thrusting at him. “They are coming! Go on!”

Then my brother’s attention was distracted by a bearded, eagle-faced
man lugging a small handbag, which split even as my brother’s eyes
rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to break up
into separate coins as it struck the ground. They rolled hither and
thither among the struggling feet of men and horses. The man stopped
and looked stupidly at the heap, and the shaft of a cab struck his
shoulder and sent him reeling. He gave a shriek and dodged back, and a
cartwheel shaved him narrowly.

“Way!” cried the men all about him. “Make way!”

So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with both hands open,
upon the heap of coins, and began thrusting handfuls in his pocket. A
horse rose close upon him, and in another moment, half rising, he had
been borne down under the horse’s hoofs.

“Stop!” screamed my brother, and pushing a woman out of his way, tried
to clutch the bit of the horse.

Before he could get to it, he heard a scream under the wheels, and saw
through the dust the rim passing over the poor wretch’s back. The
driver of the cart slashed his whip at my brother, who ran round behind
the cart. The multitudinous shouting confused his ears. The man was
writhing in the dust among his scattered money, unable to rise, for the
wheel had broken his back, and his lower limbs lay limp and dead. My
brother stood up and yelled at the next driver, and a man on a black
horse came to his assistance.

“Get him out of the road,” said he; and, clutching the man’s collar
with his free hand, my brother lugged him sideways. But he still
clutched after his money, and regarded my brother fiercely, hammering
at his arm with a handful of gold. “Go on! Go on!” shouted angry voices
behind. “Way! Way!”

There was a smash as the pole of a carriage crashed into the cart that
the man on horseback stopped. My brother looked up, and the man with
the gold twisted his head round and bit the wrist that held his collar.
There was a concussion, and the black horse came staggering sideways,
and the carthorse pushed beside it. A hoof missed my brother’s foot by
a hair’s breadth. He released his grip on the fallen man and jumped
back. He saw anger change to terror on the face of the poor wretch on
the ground, and in a moment he was hidden and my brother was borne
backward and carried past the entrance of the lane, and had to fight
hard in the torrent to recover it.

He saw Miss Elphinstone covering her eyes, and a little child, with all
a child’s want of sympathetic imagination, staring with dilated eyes at
a dusty something that lay black and still, ground and crushed under
the rolling wheels. “Let us go back!” he shouted, and began turning the
pony round. “We cannot cross this—hell,” he said and they went back a
hundred yards the way they had come, until the fighting crowd was
hidden. As they passed the bend in the lane my brother saw the face of
the dying man in the ditch under the privet, deadly white and drawn,
and shining with perspiration. The two women sat silent, crouching in
their seat and shivering.

Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again. Miss Elphinstone was
white and pale, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too wretched even to
call upon “George.” My brother was horrified and perplexed. So soon as
they had retreated he realised how urgent and unavoidable it was to
attempt this crossing. He turned to Miss Elphinstone, suddenly
resolute.

“We must go that way,” he said, and led the pony round again.

For the second time that day this girl proved her quality. To force
their way into the torrent of people, my brother plunged into the
traffic and held back a cab horse, while she drove the pony across its
head. A waggon locked wheels for a moment and ripped a long splinter
from the chaise. In another moment they were caught and swept forward
by the stream. My brother, with the cabman’s whip marks red across his
face and hands, scrambled into the chaise and took the reins from her.

“Point the revolver at the man behind,” he said, giving it to her, “if
he presses us too hard. No!—point it at his horse.”

Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right across
the road. But once in the stream he seemed to lose volition, to become
a part of that dusty rout. They swept through Chipping Barnet with the
torrent; they were nearly a mile beyond the centre of the town before
they had fought across to the opposite side of the way. It was din and
confusion indescribable; but in and beyond the town the road forks
repeatedly, and this to some extent relieved the stress.

They struck eastward through Hadley, and there on either side of the
road, and at another place farther on they came upon a great multitude
of people drinking at the stream, some fighting to come at the water.
And farther on, from a lull near East Barnet, they saw two trains
running slowly one after the other without signal or order—trains
swarming with people, with men even among the coals behind the
engines—going northward along the Great Northern Railway. My brother
supposes they must have filled outside London, for at that time the
furious terror of the people had rendered the central termini
impossible.

Near this place they halted for the rest of the afternoon, for the
violence of the day had already utterly exhausted all three of them.
They began to suffer the beginnings of hunger; the night was cold, and
none of them dared to sleep. And in the evening many people came
hurrying along the road nearby their stopping place, fleeing from
unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction from which my
brother had come.




XVII.
THE “THUNDER CHILD”.


Had the Martians aimed only at destruction, they might on Monday have
annihilated the entire population of London, as it spread itself slowly
through the home counties. Not only along the road through Barnet, but
also through Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the roads eastward to
Southend and Shoeburyness, and south of the Thames to Deal and
Broadstairs, poured the same frantic rout. If one could have hung that
June morning in a balloon in the blazing blue above London every
northward and eastward road running out of the tangled maze of streets
would have seemed stippled black with the streaming fugitives, each dot
a human agony of terror and physical distress. I have set forth at
length in the last chapter my brother’s account of the road through
Chipping Barnet, in order that my readers may realise how that swarming
of black dots appeared to one of those concerned. Never before in the
history of the world had such a mass of human beings moved and suffered
together. The legendary hosts of Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asia
has ever seen, would have been but a drop in that current. And this was
no disciplined march; it was a stampede—a stampede gigantic and
terrible—without order and without a goal, six million people unarmed
and unprovisioned, driving headlong. It was the beginning of the rout
of civilisation, of the massacre of mankind.

Directly below him the balloonist would have seen the network of
streets far and wide, houses, churches, squares, crescents,
gardens—already derelict—spread out like a huge map, and in the
southward _blotted_. Over Ealing, Richmond, Wimbledon, it would have
seemed as if some monstrous pen had flung ink upon the chart. Steadily,
incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, shooting out
ramifications this way and that, now banking itself against rising
ground, now pouring swiftly over a crest into a new-found valley,
exactly as a gout of ink would spread itself upon blotting paper.

And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of the river, the
glittering Martians went to and fro, calmly and methodically spreading
their poison cloud over this patch of country and then over that,
laying it again with their steam jets when it had served its purpose,
and taking possession of the conquered country. They do not seem to
have aimed at extermination so much as at complete demoralisation and
the destruction of any opposition. They exploded any stores of powder
they came upon, cut every telegraph, and wrecked the railways here and
there. They were hamstringing mankind. They seemed in no hurry to
extend the field of their operations, and did not come beyond the
central part of London all that day. It is possible that a very
considerable number of people in London stuck to their houses through
Monday morning. Certain it is that many died at home suffocated by the
Black Smoke.

Until about midday the Pool of London was an astonishing scene.
Steamboats and shipping of all sorts lay there, tempted by the enormous
sums of money offered by fugitives, and it is said that many who swam
out to these vessels were thrust off with boathooks and drowned. About
one o’clock in the afternoon the thinning remnant of a cloud of the
black vapour appeared between the arches of Blackfriars Bridge. At that
the Pool became a scene of mad confusion, fighting, and collision, and
for some time a multitude of boats and barges jammed in the northern
arch of the Tower Bridge, and the sailors and lightermen had to fight
savagely against the people who swarmed upon them from the riverfront.
People were actually clambering down the piers of the bridge from
above.

When, an hour later, a Martian appeared beyond the Clock Tower and
waded down the river, nothing but wreckage floated above Limehouse.

Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to tell. The
sixth star fell at Wimbledon. My brother, keeping watch beside the
women in the chaise in a meadow, saw the green flash of it far beyond
the hills. On Tuesday the little party, still set upon getting across
the sea, made its way through the swarming country towards Colchester.
The news that the Martians were now in possession of the whole of
London was confirmed. They had been seen at Highgate, and even, it was
said, at Neasden. But they did not come into my brother’s view until
the morrow.

That day the scattered multitudes began to realise the urgent need of
provisions. As they grew hungry the rights of property ceased to be
regarded. Farmers were out to defend their cattle-sheds, granaries, and
ripening root crops with arms in their hands. A number of people now,
like my brother, had their faces eastward, and there were some
desperate souls even going back towards London to get food. These were
chiefly people from the northern suburbs, whose knowledge of the Black
Smoke came by hearsay. He heard that about half the members of the
government had gathered at Birmingham, and that enormous quantities of
high explosives were being prepared to be used in automatic mines
across the Midland counties.

He was also told that the Midland Railway Company had replaced the
desertions of the first day’s panic, had resumed traffic, and was
running northward trains from St. Albans to relieve the congestion of
the home counties. There was also a placard in Chipping Ongar
announcing that large stores of flour were available in the northern
towns and that within twenty-four hours bread would be distributed
among the starving people in the neighbourhood. But this intelligence
did not deter him from the plan of escape he had formed, and the three
pressed eastward all day, and heard no more of the bread distribution
than this promise. Nor, as a matter of fact, did anyone else hear more
of it. That night fell the seventh star, falling upon Primrose Hill. It
fell while Miss Elphinstone was watching, for she took that duty
alternately with my brother. She saw it.

On Wednesday the three fugitives—they had passed the night in a field
of unripe wheat—reached Chelmsford, and there a body of the
inhabitants, calling itself the Committee of Public Supply, seized the
pony as provisions, and would give nothing in exchange for it but the
promise of a share in it the next day. Here there were rumours of
Martians at Epping, and news of the destruction of Waltham Abbey Powder
Mills in a vain attempt to blow up one of the invaders.

People were watching for Martians here from the church towers. My
brother, very luckily for him as it chanced, preferred to push on at
once to the coast rather than wait for food, although all three of them
were very hungry. By midday they passed through Tillingham, which,
strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and deserted, save for a
few furtive plunderers hunting for food. Near Tillingham they suddenly
came in sight of the sea, and the most amazing crowd of shipping of all
sorts that it is possible to imagine.

For after the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they came on
to the Essex coast, to Harwich and Walton and Clacton, and afterwards
to Foulness and Shoebury, to bring off the people. They lay in a huge
sickle-shaped curve that vanished into mist at last towards the Naze.
Close inshore was a multitude of fishing smacks—English, Scotch,
French, Dutch, and Swedish; steam launches from the Thames, yachts,
electric boats; and beyond were ships of larger burden, a multitude of
filthy colliers, trim merchantmen, cattle ships, passenger boats,
petroleum tanks, ocean tramps, an old white transport even, neat white
and grey liners from Southampton and Hamburg; and along the blue coast
across the Blackwater my brother could make out dimly a dense swarm of
boats chaffering with the people on the beach, a swarm which also
extended up the Blackwater almost to Maldon.

About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad, very low in the water,
almost, to my brother’s perception, like a water-logged ship. This was
the ram _Thunder Child_. It was the only warship in sight, but far away
to the right over the smooth surface of the sea—for that day there was
a dead calm—lay a serpent of black smoke to mark the next ironclads of
the Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended line, steam up and
ready for action, across the Thames estuary during the course of the
Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it.

At the sight of the sea, Mrs. Elphinstone, in spite of the assurances
of her sister-in-law, gave way to panic. She had never been out of
England before, she would rather die than trust herself friendless in a
foreign country, and so forth. She seemed, poor woman, to imagine that
the French and the Martians might prove very similar. She had been
growing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and depressed during the two
days’ journeyings. Her great idea was to return to Stanmore. Things had
been always well and safe at Stanmore. They would find George at
Stanmore....

It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to the
beach, where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the attention
of some men on a paddle steamer from the Thames. They sent a boat and
drove a bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. The steamer was
going, these men said, to Ostend.

It was about two o’clock when my brother, having paid their fares at
the gangway, found himself safely aboard the steamboat with his
charges. There was food aboard, albeit at exorbitant prices, and the
three of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats forward.

There were already a couple of score of passengers aboard, some of whom
had expended their last money in securing a passage, but the captain
lay off the Blackwater until five in the afternoon, picking up
passengers until the seated decks were even dangerously crowded. He
would probably have remained longer had it not been for the sound of
guns that began about that hour in the south. As if in answer, the
ironclad seaward fired a small gun and hoisted a string of flags. A jet
of smoke sprang out of her funnels.

Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing came from
Shoeburyness, until it was noticed that it was growing louder. At the
same time, far away in the southeast the masts and upperworks of three
ironclads rose one after the other out of the sea, beneath clouds of
black smoke. But my brother’s attention speedily reverted to the
distant firing in the south. He fancied he saw a column of smoke rising
out of the distant grey haze.

The little steamer was already flapping her way eastward of the big
crescent of shipping, and the low Essex coast was growing blue and
hazy, when a Martian appeared, small and faint in the remote distance,
advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of Foulness. At that
the captain on the bridge swore at the top of his voice with fear and
anger at his own delay, and the paddles seemed infected with his
terror. Every soul aboard stood at the bulwarks or on the seats of the
steamer and stared at that distant shape, higher than the trees or
church towers inland, and advancing with a leisurely parody of a human
stride.

It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more amazed
than terrified, watching this Titan advancing deliberately towards the
shipping, wading farther and farther into the water as the coast fell
away. Then, far away beyond the Crouch, came another, striding over
some stunted trees, and then yet another, still farther off, wading
deeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang halfway up between
sea and sky. They were all stalking seaward, as if to intercept the
escape of the multitudinous vessels that were crowded between Foulness
and the Naze. In spite of the throbbing exertions of the engines of the
little paddle-boat, and the pouring foam that her wheels flung behind
her, she receded with terrifying slowness from this ominous advance.

Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large crescent of shipping
already writhing with the approaching terror; one ship passing behind
another, another coming round from broadside to end on, steamships
whistling and giving off volumes of steam, sails being let out,
launches rushing hither and thither. He was so fascinated by this and
by the creeping danger away to the left that he had no eyes for
anything seaward. And then a swift movement of the steamboat (she had
suddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung him headlong from
the seat upon which he was standing. There was a shouting all about
him, a trampling of feet, and a cheer that seemed to be answered
faintly. The steamboat lurched and rolled him over upon his hands.

He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, and not a hundred yards
from their heeling, pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the blade of a
plough tearing through the water, tossing it on either side in huge
waves of foam that leaped towards the steamer, flinging her paddles
helplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck down almost to the
waterline.

A douche of spray blinded my brother for a moment. When his eyes were
clear again he saw the monster had passed and was rushing landward. Big
iron upperworks rose out of this headlong structure, and from that twin
funnels projected and spat a smoking blast shot with fire. It was the
torpedo ram, _Thunder Child_, steaming headlong, coming to the rescue
of the threatened shipping.

Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by clutching the bulwarks, my
brother looked past this charging leviathan at the Martians again, and
he saw the three of them now close together, and standing so far out to
sea that their tripod supports were almost entirely submerged. Thus
sunken, and seen in remote perspective, they appeared far less
formidable than the huge iron bulk in whose wake the steamer was
pitching so helplessly. It would seem they were regarding this new
antagonist with astonishment. To their intelligence, it may be, the
giant was even such another as themselves. The _Thunder Child_ fired no
gun, but simply drove full speed towards them. It was probably her not
firing that enabled her to get so near the enemy as she did. They did
not know what to make of her. One shell, and they would have sent her
to the bottom forthwith with the Heat-Ray.

She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she seemed halfway
between the steamboat and the Martians—a diminishing black bulk against
the receding horizontal expanse of the Essex coast.

Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his tube and discharged a
canister of the black gas at the ironclad. It hit her larboard side and
glanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an unfolding
torrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove clear. To the
watchers from the steamer, low in the water and with the sun in their
eyes, it seemed as though she were already among the Martians.

They saw the gaunt figures separating and rising out of the water as
they retreated shoreward, and one of them raised the camera-like
generator of the Heat-Ray. He held it pointing obliquely downward, and
a bank of steam sprang from the water at its touch. It must have driven
through the iron of the ship’s side like a white-hot iron rod through
paper.

A flicker of flame went up through the rising steam, and then the
Martian reeled and staggered. In another moment he was cut down, and a
great body of water and steam shot high in the air. The guns of the
_Thunder Child_ sounded through the reek, going off one after the
other, and one shot splashed the water high close by the steamer,
ricocheted towards the other flying ships to the north, and smashed a
smack to matchwood.

But no one heeded that very much. At the sight of the Martian’s
collapse the captain on the bridge yelled inarticulately, and all the
crowding passengers on the steamer’s stern shouted together. And then
they yelled again. For, surging out beyond the white tumult, drove
something long and black, the flames streaming from its middle parts,
its ventilators and funnels spouting fire.

She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was intact and her
engines working. She headed straight for a second Martian, and was
within a hundred yards of him when the Heat-Ray came to bear. Then with
a violent thud, a blinding flash, her decks, her funnels, leaped
upward. The Martian staggered with the violence of her explosion, and
in another moment the flaming wreckage, still driving forward with the
impetus of its pace, had struck him and crumpled him up like a thing of
cardboard. My brother shouted involuntarily. A boiling tumult of steam
hid everything again.

“Two!” yelled the captain.

Everyone was shouting. The whole steamer from end to end rang with
frantic cheering that was taken up first by one and then by all in the
crowding multitude of ships and boats that was driving out to sea.

The steam hung upon the water for many minutes, hiding the third
Martian and the coast altogether. And all this time the boat was
paddling steadily out to sea and away from the fight; and when at last
the confusion cleared, the drifting bank of black vapour intervened,
and nothing of the _Thunder Child_ could be made out, nor could the
third Martian be seen. But the ironclads to seaward were now quite
close and standing in towards shore past the steamboat.

The little vessel continued to beat its way seaward, and the ironclads
receded slowly towards the coast, which was hidden still by a marbled
bank of vapour, part steam, part black gas, eddying and combining in
the strangest way. The fleet of refugees was scattering to the
northeast; several smacks were sailing between the ironclads and the
steamboat. After a time, and before they reached the sinking cloud
bank, the warships turned northward, and then abruptly went about and
passed into the thickening haze of evening southward. The coast grew
faint, and at last indistinguishable amid the low banks of clouds that
were gathering about the sinking sun.

Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset came the vibration
of guns, and a form of black shadows moving. Everyone struggled to the
rail of the steamer and peered into the blinding furnace of the west,
but nothing was to be distinguished clearly. A mass of smoke rose
slanting and barred the face of the sun. The steamboat throbbed on its
way through an interminable suspense.

The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky flushed and darkened, the
evening star trembled into sight. It was deep twilight when the captain
cried out and pointed. My brother strained his eyes. Something rushed
up into the sky out of the greyness—rushed slantingly upward and very
swiftly into the luminous clearness above the clouds in the western
sky; something flat and broad, and very large, that swept round in a
vast curve, grew smaller, sank slowly, and vanished again into the grey
mystery of the night. And as it flew it rained down darkness upon the
land.




BOOK TWO
THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS.




I.
UNDER FOOT.


In the first book I have wandered so much from my own adventures to
tell of the experiences of my brother that all through the last two
chapters I and the curate have been lurking in the empty house at
Halliford whither we fled to escape the Black Smoke. There I will
resume. We stopped there all Sunday night and all the next day—the day
of the panic—in a little island of daylight, cut off by the Black Smoke
from the rest of the world. We could do nothing but wait in aching
inactivity during those two weary days.

My mind was occupied by anxiety for my wife. I figured her at
Leatherhead, terrified, in danger, mourning me already as a dead man. I
paced the rooms and cried aloud when I thought of how I was cut off
from her, of all that might happen to her in my absence. My cousin I
knew was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of man
to realise danger quickly, to rise promptly. What was needed now was
not bravery, but circumspection. My only consolation was to believe
that the Martians were moving Londonward and away from her. Such vague
anxieties keep the mind sensitive and painful. I grew very weary and
irritable with the curate’s perpetual ejaculations; I tired of the
sight of his selfish despair. After some ineffectual remonstrance I
kept away from him, staying in a room—evidently a children’s
schoolroom—containing globes, forms, and copybooks. When he followed me
thither, I went to a box room at the top of the house and, in order to
be alone with my aching miseries, locked myself in.

We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black Smoke all that day and the
morning of the next. There were signs of people in the next house on
Sunday evening—a face at a window and moving lights, and later the
slamming of a door. But I do not know who these people were, nor what
became of them. We saw nothing of them next day. The Black Smoke
drifted slowly riverward all through Monday morning, creeping nearer
and nearer to us, driving at last along the roadway outside the house
that hid us.

A Martian came across the fields about midday, laying the stuff with a
jet of superheated steam that hissed against the walls, smashed all the
windows it touched, and scalded the curate’s hand as he fled out of the
front room. When at last we crept across the sodden rooms and looked
out again, the country northward was as though a black snowstorm had
passed over it. Looking towards the river, we were astonished to see an
unaccountable redness mingling with the black of the scorched meadows.

For a time we did not see how this change affected our position, save
that we were relieved of our fear of the Black Smoke. But later I
perceived that we were no longer hemmed in, that now we might get away.
So soon as I realised that the way of escape was open, my dream of
action returned. But the curate was lethargic, unreasonable.

“We are safe here,” he repeated; “safe here.”

I resolved to leave him—would that I had! Wiser now for the
artilleryman’s teaching, I sought out food and drink. I had found oil
and rags for my burns, and I also took a hat and a flannel shirt that I
found in one of the bedrooms. When it was clear to him that I meant to
go alone—had reconciled myself to going alone—he suddenly roused
himself to come. And all being quiet throughout the afternoon, we
started about five o’clock, as I should judge, along the blackened road
to Sunbury.

In Sunbury, and at intervals along the road, were dead bodies lying in
contorted attitudes, horses as well as men, overturned carts and
luggage, all covered thickly with black dust. That pall of cindery
powder made me think of what I had read of the destruction of Pompeii.
We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of strange
and unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton Court our eyes were relieved
to find a patch of green that had escaped the suffocating drift. We
went through Bushey Park, with its deer going to and fro under the
chestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in the distance towards
Hampton, and so we came to Twickenham. These were the first people we
saw.

Away across the road the woods beyond Ham and Petersham were still
afire. Twickenham was uninjured by either Heat-Ray or Black Smoke, and
there were more people about here, though none could give us news. For
the most part they were like ourselves, taking advantage of a lull to
shift their quarters. I have an impression that many of the houses here
were still occupied by scared inhabitants, too frightened even for
flight. Here too the evidence of a hasty rout was abundant along the
road. I remember most vividly three smashed bicycles in a heap, pounded
into the road by the wheels of subsequent carts. We crossed Richmond
Bridge about half past eight. We hurried across the exposed bridge, of
course, but I noticed floating down the stream a number of red masses,
some many feet across. I did not know what these were—there was no time
for scrutiny—and I put a more horrible interpretation on them than they
deserved. Here again on the Surrey side were black dust that had once
been smoke, and dead bodies—a heap near the approach to the station;
but we had no glimpse of the Martians until we were some way towards
Barnes.

We saw in the blackened distance a group of three people running down a
side street towards the river, but otherwise it seemed deserted. Up the
hill Richmond town was burning briskly; outside the town of Richmond
there was no trace of the Black Smoke.

Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a number of people running,
and the upperworks of a Martian fighting-machine loomed in sight over
the housetops, not a hundred yards away from us. We stood aghast at our
danger, and had the Martian looked down we must immediately have
perished. We were so terrified that we dared not go on, but turned
aside and hid in a shed in a garden. There the curate crouched, weeping
silently, and refusing to stir again.

But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not let me rest, and in
the twilight I ventured out again. I went through a shrubbery, and
along a passage beside a big house standing in its own grounds, and so
emerged upon the road towards Kew. The curate I left in the shed, but
he came hurrying after me.

That second start was the most foolhardy thing I ever did. For it was
manifest the Martians were about us. No sooner had the curate overtaken
me than we saw either the fighting-machine we had seen before or
another, far away across the meadows in the direction of Kew Lodge.
Four or five little black figures hurried before it across the
green-grey of the field, and in a moment it was evident this Martian
pursued them. In three strides he was among them, and they ran
radiating from his feet in all directions. He used no Heat-Ray to
destroy them, but picked them up one by one. Apparently he tossed them
into the great metallic carrier which projected behind him, much as a
workman’s basket hangs over his shoulder.

It was the first time I realised that the Martians might have any other
purpose than destruction with defeated humanity. We stood for a moment
petrified, then turned and fled through a gate behind us into a walled
garden, fell into, rather than found, a fortunate ditch, and lay there,
scarce daring to whisper to each other until the stars were out.

I suppose it was nearly eleven o’clock before we gathered courage to
start again, no longer venturing into the road, but sneaking along
hedgerows and through plantations, and watching keenly through the
darkness, he on the right and I on the left, for the Martians, who
seemed to be all about us. In one place we blundered upon a scorched
and blackened area, now cooling and ashen, and a number of scattered
dead bodies of men, burned horribly about the heads and trunks but with
their legs and boots mostly intact; and of dead horses, fifty feet,
perhaps, behind a line of four ripped guns and smashed gun carriages.

Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, but the place was silent and
deserted. Here we happened on no dead, though the night was too dark
for us to see into the side roads of the place. In Sheen my companion
suddenly complained of faintness and thirst, and we decided to try one
of the houses.

The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with the window,
was a small semi-detached villa, and I found nothing eatable left in
the place but some mouldy cheese. There was, however, water to drink;
and I took a hatchet, which promised to be useful in our next
house-breaking.

We then crossed to a place where the road turns towards Mortlake. Here
there stood a white house within a walled garden, and in the pantry of
this domicile we found a store of food—two loaves of bread in a pan, an
uncooked steak, and the half of a ham. I give this catalogue so
precisely because, as it happened, we were destined to subsist upon
this store for the next fortnight. Bottled beer stood under a shelf,
and there were two bags of haricot beans and some limp lettuces. This
pantry opened into a kind of wash-up kitchen, and in this was firewood;
there was also a cupboard, in which we found nearly a dozen of
burgundy, tinned soups and salmon, and two tins of biscuits.

We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the dark—for we dared not strike a
light—and ate bread and ham, and drank beer out of the same bottle. The
curate, who was still timorous and restless, was now, oddly enough, for
pushing on, and I was urging him to keep up his strength by eating when
the thing happened that was to imprison us.

“It can’t be midnight yet,” I said, and then came a blinding glare of
vivid green light. Everything in the kitchen leaped out, clearly
visible in green and black, and vanished again. And then followed such
a concussion as I have never heard before or since. So close on the
heels of this as to seem instantaneous came a thud behind me, a clash
of glass, a crash and rattle of falling masonry all about us, and the
plaster of the ceiling came down upon us, smashing into a multitude of
fragments upon our heads. I was knocked headlong across the floor
against the oven handle and stunned. I was insensible for a long time,
the curate told me, and when I came to we were in darkness again, and
he, with a face wet, as I found afterwards, with blood from a cut
forehead, was dabbing water over me.

For some time I could not recollect what had happened. Then things came
to me slowly. A bruise on my temple asserted itself.

“Are you better?” asked the curate in a whisper.

At last I answered him. I sat up.

“Don’t move,” he said. “The floor is covered with smashed crockery from
the dresser. You can’t possibly move without making a noise, and I
fancy _they_ are outside.”

We both sat quite silent, so that we could scarcely hear each other
breathing. Everything seemed deadly still, but once something near us,
some plaster or broken brickwork, slid down with a rumbling sound.
Outside and very near was an intermittent, metallic rattle.

“That!” said the curate, when presently it happened again.

“Yes,” I said. “But what is it?”

“A Martian!” said the curate.

I listened again.

“It was not like the Heat-Ray,” I said, and for a time I was inclined
to think one of the great fighting-machines had stumbled against the
house, as I had seen one stumble against the tower of Shepperton
Church.

Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three or
four hours, until the dawn came, we scarcely moved. And then the light
filtered in, not through the window, which remained black, but through
a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken bricks in the
wall behind us. The interior of the kitchen we now saw greyly for the
first time.

The window had been burst in by a mass of garden mould, which flowed
over the table upon which we had been sitting and lay about our feet.
Outside, the soil was banked high against the house. At the top of the
window frame we could see an uprooted drainpipe. The floor was littered
with smashed hardware; the end of the kitchen towards the house was
broken into, and since the daylight shone in there, it was evident the
greater part of the house had collapsed. Contrasting vividly with this
ruin was the neat dresser, stained in the fashion, pale green, and with
a number of copper and tin vessels below it, the wallpaper imitating
blue and white tiles, and a couple of coloured supplements fluttering
from the walls above the kitchen range.

As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through the gap in the wall the body
of a Martian, standing sentinel, I suppose, over the still glowing
cylinder. At the sight of that we crawled as circumspectly as possible
out of the twilight of the kitchen into the darkness of the scullery.

Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my mind.

“The fifth cylinder,” I whispered, “the fifth shot from Mars, has
struck this house and buried us under the ruins!”

For a time the curate was silent, and then he whispered:

“God have mercy upon us!”

I heard him presently whimpering to himself.

Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I for my part
scarce dared breathe, and sat with my eyes fixed on the faint light of
the kitchen door. I could just see the curate’s face, a dim, oval
shape, and his collar and cuffs. Outside there began a metallic
hammering, then a violent hooting, and then again, after a quiet
interval, a hissing like the hissing of an engine. These noises, for
the most part problematical, continued intermittently, and seemed if
anything to increase in number as time wore on. Presently a measured
thudding and a vibration that made everything about us quiver and the
vessels in the pantry ring and shift, began and continued. Once the
light was eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen doorway became absolutely
dark. For many hours we must have crouched there, silent and shivering,
until our tired attention failed. . . .

At last I found myself awake and very hungry. I am inclined to believe
we must have spent the greater portion of a day before that awakening.
My hunger was at a stride so insistent that it moved me to action. I
told the curate I was going to seek food, and felt my way towards the
pantry. He made me no answer, but so soon as I began eating the faint
noise I made stirred him up and I heard him crawling after me.




II.
WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE.


After eating we crept back to the scullery, and there I must have dozed
again, for when presently I looked round I was alone. The thudding
vibration continued with wearisome persistence. I whispered for the
curate several times, and at last felt my way to the door of the
kitchen. It was still daylight, and I perceived him across the room,
lying against the triangular hole that looked out upon the Martians.
His shoulders were hunched, so that his head was hidden from me.

I could hear a number of noises almost like those in an engine shed;
and the place rocked with that beating thud. Through the aperture in
the wall I could see the top of a tree touched with gold and the warm
blue of a tranquil evening sky. For a minute or so I remained watching
the curate, and then I advanced, crouching and stepping with extreme
care amid the broken crockery that littered the floor.

I touched the curate’s leg, and he started so violently that a mass of
plaster went sliding down outside and fell with a loud impact. I
gripped his arm, fearing he might cry out, and for a long time we
crouched motionless. Then I turned to see how much of our rampart
remained. The detachment of the plaster had left a vertical slit open
in the debris, and by raising myself cautiously across a beam I was
able to see out of this gap into what had been overnight a quiet
suburban roadway. Vast, indeed, was the change that we beheld.

The fifth cylinder must have fallen right into the midst of the house
we had first visited. The building had vanished, completely smashed,
pulverised, and dispersed by the blow. The cylinder lay now far beneath
the original foundations—deep in a hole, already vastly larger than the
pit I had looked into at Woking. The earth all round it had splashed
under that tremendous impact—“splashed” is the only word—and lay in
heaped piles that hid the masses of the adjacent houses. It had behaved
exactly like mud under the violent blow of a hammer. Our house had
collapsed backward; the front portion, even on the ground floor, had
been destroyed completely; by a chance the kitchen and scullery had
escaped, and stood buried now under soil and ruins, closed in by tons
of earth on every side save towards the cylinder. Over that aspect we
hung now on the very edge of the great circular pit the Martians were
engaged in making. The heavy beating sound was evidently just behind
us, and ever and again a bright green vapour drove up like a veil
across our peephole.

The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the pit, and on the
farther edge of the pit, amid the smashed and gravel-heaped shrubbery,
one of the great fighting-machines, deserted by its occupant, stood
stiff and tall against the evening sky. At first I scarcely noticed the
pit and the cylinder, although it has been convenient to describe them
first, on account of the extraordinary glittering mechanism I saw busy
in the excavation, and on account of the strange creatures that were
crawling slowly and painfully across the heaped mould near it.

The mechanism it certainly was that held my attention first. It was one
of those complicated fabrics that have since been called
handling-machines, and the study of which has already given such an
enormous impetus to terrestrial invention. As it dawned upon me first,
it presented a sort of metallic spider with five jointed, agile legs,
and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, bars, and reaching
and clutching tentacles about its body. Most of its arms were
retracted, but with three long tentacles it was fishing out a number of
rods, plates, and bars which lined the covering and apparently
strengthened the walls of the cylinder. These, as it extracted them,
were lifted out and deposited upon a level surface of earth behind it.

Its motion was so swift, complex, and perfect that at first I did not
see it as a machine, in spite of its metallic glitter. The
fighting-machines were coordinated and animated to an extraordinary
pitch, but nothing to compare with this. People who have never seen
these structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists or
the imperfect descriptions of such eye-witnesses as myself to go upon,
scarcely realise that living quality.

I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first pamphlets to
give a consecutive account of the war. The artist had evidently made a
hasty study of one of the fighting-machines, and there his knowledge
ended. He presented them as tilted, stiff tripods, without either
flexibility or subtlety, and with an altogether misleading monotony of
effect. The pamphlet containing these renderings had a considerable
vogue, and I mention them here simply to warn the reader against the
impression they may have created. They were no more like the Martians I
saw in action than a Dutch doll is like a human being. To my mind, the
pamphlet would have been much better without them.

At first, I say, the handling-machine did not impress me as a machine,
but as a crablike creature with a glittering integument, the
controlling Martian whose delicate tentacles actuated its movements
seeming to be simply the equivalent of the crab’s cerebral portion. But
then I perceived the resemblance of its grey-brown, shiny, leathery
integument to that of the other sprawling bodies beyond, and the true
nature of this dexterous workman dawned upon me. With that realisation
my interest shifted to those other creatures, the real Martians.
Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the first nausea
no longer obscured my observation. Moreover, I was concealed and
motionless, and under no urgency of action.

They were, I now saw, the most unearthly creatures it is possible to
conceive. They were huge round bodies—or, rather, heads—about four feet
in diameter, each body having in front of it a face. This face had no
nostrils—indeed, the Martians do not seem to have had any sense of
smell, but it had a pair of very large dark-coloured eyes, and just
beneath this a kind of fleshy beak. In the back of this head or body—I
scarcely know how to speak of it—was the single tight tympanic surface,
since known to be anatomically an ear, though it must have been almost
useless in our dense air. In a group round the mouth were sixteen
slender, almost whiplike tentacles, arranged in two bunches of eight
each. These bunches have since been named rather aptly, by that
distinguished anatomist, Professor Howes, the _hands_. Even as I saw
these Martians for the first time they seemed to be endeavouring to
raise themselves on these hands, but of course, with the increased
weight of terrestrial conditions, this was impossible. There is reason
to suppose that on Mars they may have progressed upon them with some
facility.

The internal anatomy, I may remark here, as dissection has since shown,
was almost equally simple. The greater part of the structure was the
brain, sending enormous nerves to the eyes, ear, and tactile tentacles.
Besides this were the bulky lungs, into which the mouth opened, and the
heart and its vessels. The pulmonary distress caused by the denser
atmosphere and greater gravitational attraction was only too evident in
the convulsive movements of the outer skin.

And this was the sum of the Martian organs. Strange as it may seem to a
human being, all the complex apparatus of digestion, which makes up the
bulk of our bodies, did not exist in the Martians. They were
heads—merely heads. Entrails they had none. They did not eat, much less
digest. Instead, they took the fresh, living blood of other creatures,
and _injected_ it into their own veins. I have myself seen this being
done, as I shall mention in its place. But, squeamish as I may seem, I
cannot bring myself to describe what I could not endure even to
continue watching. Let it suffice to say, blood obtained from a still
living animal, in most cases from a human being, was run directly by
means of a little pipette into the recipient canal. . . .

The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly repulsive to us, but at the
same time I think that we should remember how repulsive our carnivorous
habits would seem to an intelligent rabbit.

The physiological advantages of the practice of injection are
undeniable, if one thinks of the tremendous waste of human time and
energy occasioned by eating and the digestive process. Our bodies are
half made up of glands and tubes and organs, occupied in turning
heterogeneous food into blood. The digestive processes and their
reaction upon the nervous system sap our strength and colour our minds.
Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers, or
sound gastric glands. But the Martians were lifted above all these
organic fluctuations of mood and emotion.

Their undeniable preference for men as their source of nourishment is
partly explained by the nature of the remains of the victims they had
brought with them as provisions from Mars. These creatures, to judge
from the shrivelled remains that have fallen into human hands, were
bipeds with flimsy, silicious skeletons (almost like those of the
silicious sponges) and feeble musculature, standing about six feet high
and having round, erect heads, and large eyes in flinty sockets. Two or
three of these seem to have been brought in each cylinder, and all were
killed before earth was reached. It was just as well for them, for the
mere attempt to stand upright upon our planet would have broken every
bone in their bodies.

And while I am engaged in this description, I may add in this place
certain further details which, although they were not all evident to us
at the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted with them to
form a clearer picture of these offensive creatures.

In three other points their physiology differed strangely from ours.
Their organisms did not sleep, any more than the heart of man sleeps.
Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism to recuperate, that
periodical extinction was unknown to them. They had little or no sense
of fatigue, it would seem. On earth they could never have moved without
effort, yet even to the last they kept in action. In twenty-four hours
they did twenty-four hours of work, as even on earth is perhaps the
case with the ants.

In the next place, wonderful as it seems in a sexual world, the
Martians were absolutely without sex, and therefore without any of the
tumultuous emotions that arise from that difference among men. A young
Martian, there can now be no dispute, was really born upon earth during
the war, and it was found attached to its parent, partially _budded_
off, just as young lilybulbs bud off, or like the young animals in the
fresh-water polyp.

In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, such a method of
increase has disappeared; but even on this earth it was certainly the
primitive method. Among the lower animals, up even to those first
cousins of the vertebrated animals, the Tunicates, the two processes
occur side by side, but finally the sexual method superseded its
competitor altogether. On Mars, however, just the reverse has
apparently been the case.

It is worthy of remark that a certain speculative writer of
quasi-scientific repute, writing long before the Martian invasion, did
forecast for man a final structure not unlike the actual Martian
condition. His prophecy, I remember, appeared in November or December,
1893, in a long-defunct publication, the _Pall Mall Budget_, and I
recall a caricature of it in a pre-Martian periodical called _Punch_.
He pointed out—writing in a foolish, facetious tone—that the perfection
of mechanical appliances must ultimately supersede limbs; the
perfection of chemical devices, digestion; that such organs as hair,
external nose, teeth, ears, and chin were no longer essential parts of
the human being, and that the tendency of natural selection would lie
in the direction of their steady diminution through the coming ages.
The brain alone remained a cardinal necessity. Only one other part of
the body had a strong case for survival, and that was the hand,
“teacher and agent of the brain.” While the rest of the body dwindled,
the hands would grow larger.

There is many a true word written in jest, and here in the Martians we
have beyond dispute the actual accomplishment of such a suppression of
the animal side of the organism by the intelligence. To me it is quite
credible that the Martians may be descended from beings not unlike
ourselves, by a gradual development of brain and hands (the latter
giving rise to the two bunches of delicate tentacles at last) at the
expense of the rest of the body. Without the body the brain would, of
course, become a mere selfish intelligence, without any of the
emotional substratum of the human being.

The last salient point in which the systems of these creatures differed
from ours was in what one might have thought a very trivial particular.
Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease and pain on earth, have
either never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary science eliminated
them ages ago. A hundred diseases, all the fevers and contagions of
human life, consumption, cancers, tumours and such morbidities, never
enter the scheme of their life. And speaking of the differences between
the life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may allude here to the curious
suggestions of the red weed.

Apparently the vegetable kingdom in Mars, instead of having green for a
dominant colour, is of a vivid blood-red tint. At any rate, the seeds
which the Martians (intentionally or accidentally) brought with them
gave rise in all cases to red-coloured growths. Only that known
popularly as the red weed, however, gained any footing in competition
with terrestrial forms. The red creeper was quite a transitory growth,
and few people have seen it growing. For a time, however, the red weed
grew with astonishing vigour and luxuriance. It spread up the sides of
the pit by the third or fourth day of our imprisonment, and its
cactus-like branches formed a carmine fringe to the edges of our
triangular window. And afterwards I found it broadcast throughout the
country, and especially wherever there was a stream of water.

The Martians had what appears to have been an auditory organ, a single
round drum at the back of the head-body, and eyes with a visual range
not very different from ours except that, according to Philips, blue
and violet were as black to them. It is commonly supposed that they
communicated by sounds and tentacular gesticulations; this is asserted,
for instance, in the able but hastily compiled pamphlet (written
evidently by someone not an eye-witness of Martian actions) to which I
have already alluded, and which, so far, has been the chief source of
information concerning them. Now no surviving human being saw so much
of the Martians in action as I did. I take no credit to myself for an
accident, but the fact is so. And I assert that I watched them closely
time after time, and that I have seen four, five, and (once) six of
them sluggishly performing the most elaborately complicated operations
together without either sound or gesture. Their peculiar hooting
invariably preceded feeding; it had no modulation, and was, I believe,
in no sense a signal, but merely the expiration of air preparatory to
the suctional operation. I have a certain claim to at least an
elementary knowledge of psychology, and in this matter I am
convinced—as firmly as I am convinced of anything—that the Martians
interchanged thoughts without any physical intermediation. And I have
been convinced of this in spite of strong preconceptions. Before the
Martian invasion, as an occasional reader here or there may remember, I
had written with some little vehemence against the telepathic theory.

The Martians wore no clothing. Their conceptions of ornament and
decorum were necessarily different from ours; and not only were they
evidently much less sensible of changes of temperature than we are, but
changes of pressure do not seem to have affected their health at all
seriously. Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in the other
artificial additions to their bodily resources that their great
superiority over man lay. We men, with our bicycles and road-skates,
our Lilienthal soaring-machines, our guns and sticks and so forth, are
just in the beginning of the evolution that the Martians have worked
out. They have become practically mere brains, wearing different bodies
according to their needs just as men wear suits of clothes and take a
bicycle in a hurry or an umbrella in the wet. And of their appliances,
perhaps nothing is more wonderful to a man than the curious fact that
what is the dominant feature of almost all human devices in mechanism
is absent—the _wheel_ is absent; among all the things they brought to
earth there is no trace or suggestion of their use of wheels. One would
have at least expected it in locomotion. And in this connection it is
curious to remark that even on this earth Nature has never hit upon the
wheel, or has preferred other expedients to its development. And not
only did the Martians either not know of (which is incredible), or
abstain from, the wheel, but in their apparatus singularly little use
is made of the fixed pivot or relatively fixed pivot, with circular
motions thereabout confined to one plane. Almost all the joints of the
machinery present a complicated system of sliding parts moving over
small but beautifully curved friction bearings. And while upon this
matter of detail, it is remarkable that the long leverages of their
machines are in most cases actuated by a sort of sham musculature of
the disks in an elastic sheath; these disks become polarised and drawn
closely and powerfully together when traversed by a current of
electricity. In this way the curious parallelism to animal motions,
which was so striking and disturbing to the human beholder, was
attained. Such quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike handling-machine
which, on my first peeping out of the slit, I watched unpacking the
cylinder. It seemed infinitely more alive than the actual Martians
lying beyond it in the sunset light, panting, stirring ineffectual
tentacles, and moving feebly after their vast journey across space.

While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the sunlight, and
noting each strange detail of their form, the curate reminded me of his
presence by pulling violently at my arm. I turned to a scowling face,
and silent, eloquent lips. He wanted the slit, which permitted only one
of us to peep through; and so I had to forego watching them for a time
while he enjoyed that privilege.

When I looked again, the busy handling-machine had already put together
several of the pieces of apparatus it had taken out of the cylinder
into a shape having an unmistakable likeness to its own; and down on
the left a busy little digging mechanism had come into view, emitting
jets of green vapour and working its way round the pit, excavating and
embanking in a methodical and discriminating manner. This it was which
had caused the regular beating noise, and the rhythmic shocks that had
kept our ruinous refuge quivering. It piped and whistled as it worked.
So far as I could see, the thing was without a directing Martian at
all.




III.
THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT.


The arrival of a second fighting-machine drove us from our peephole
into the scullery, for we feared that from his elevation the Martian
might see down upon us behind our barrier. At a later date we began to
feel less in danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the dazzle of the
sunlight outside our refuge must have been blank blackness, but at
first the slightest suggestion of approach drove us into the scullery
in heart-throbbing retreat. Yet terrible as was the danger we incurred,
the attraction of peeping was for both of us irresistible. And I recall
now with a sort of wonder that, in spite of the infinite danger in
which we were between starvation and a still more terrible death, we
could yet struggle bitterly for that horrible privilege of sight. We
would race across the kitchen in a grotesque way between eagerness and
the dread of making a noise, and strike each other, and thrust and
kick, within a few inches of exposure.

The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible dispositions and habits
of thought and action, and our danger and isolation only accentuated
the incompatibility. At Halliford I had already come to hate the
curate’s trick of helpless exclamation, his stupid rigidity of mind.
His endless muttering monologue vitiated every effort I made to think
out a line of action, and drove me at times, thus pent up and
intensified, almost to the verge of craziness. He was as lacking in
restraint as a silly woman. He would weep for hours together, and I
verily believe that to the very end this spoiled child of life thought
his weak tears in some way efficacious. And I would sit in the darkness
unable to keep my mind off him by reason of his importunities. He ate
more than I did, and it was in vain I pointed out that our only chance
of life was to stop in the house until the Martians had done with their
pit, that in that long patience a time might presently come when we
should need food. He ate and drank impulsively in heavy meals at long
intervals. He slept little.

As the days wore on, his utter carelessness of any consideration so
intensified our distress and danger that I had, much as I loathed doing
it, to resort to threats, and at last to blows. That brought him to
reason for a time. But he was one of those weak creatures, void of
pride, timorous, anæmic, hateful souls, full of shifty cunning, who
face neither God nor man, who face not even themselves.

It is disagreeable for me to recall and write these things, but I set
them down that my story may lack nothing. Those who have escaped the
dark and terrible aspects of life will find my brutality, my flash of
rage in our final tragedy, easy enough to blame; for they know what is
wrong as well as any, but not what is possible to tortured men. But
those who have been under the shadow, who have gone down at last to
elemental things, will have a wider charity.

And while within we fought out our dark, dim contest of whispers,
snatched food and drink, and gripping hands and blows, without, in the
pitiless sunlight of that terrible June, was the strange wonder, the
unfamiliar routine of the Martians in the pit. Let me return to those
first new experiences of mine. After a long time I ventured back to the
peephole, to find that the new-comers had been reinforced by the
occupants of no fewer than three of the fighting-machines. These last
had brought with them certain fresh appliances that stood in an orderly
manner about the cylinder. The second handling-machine was now
completed, and was busied in serving one of the novel contrivances the
big machine had brought. This was a body resembling a milk can in its
general form, above which oscillated a pear-shaped receptacle, and from
which a stream of white powder flowed into a circular basin below.

The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one tentacle of the
handling-machine. With two spatulate hands the handling-machine was
digging out and flinging masses of clay into the pear-shaped receptacle
above, while with another arm it periodically opened a door and removed
rusty and blackened clinkers from the middle part of the machine.
Another steely tentacle directed the powder from the basin along a
ribbed channel towards some receiver that was hidden from me by the
mound of bluish dust. From this unseen receiver a little thread of
green smoke rose vertically into the quiet air. As I looked, the
handling-machine, with a faint and musical clinking, extended,
telescopic fashion, a tentacle that had been a moment before a mere
blunt projection, until its end was hidden behind the mound of clay. In
another second it had lifted a bar of white aluminium into sight,
untarnished as yet, and shining dazzlingly, and deposited it in a
growing stack of bars that stood at the side of the pit. Between sunset
and starlight this dexterous machine must have made more than a hundred
such bars out of the crude clay, and the mound of bluish dust rose
steadily until it topped the side of the pit.

The contrast between the swift and complex movements of these
contrivances and the inert panting clumsiness of their masters was
acute, and for days I had to tell myself repeatedly that these latter
were indeed the living of the two things.

The curate had possession of the slit when the first men were brought
to the pit. I was sitting below, huddled up, listening with all my
ears. He made a sudden movement backward, and I, fearful that we were
observed, crouched in a spasm of terror. He came sliding down the
rubbish and crept beside me in the darkness, inarticulate,
gesticulating, and for a moment I shared his panic. His gesture
suggested a resignation of the slit, and after a little while my
curiosity gave me courage, and I rose up, stepped across him, and
clambered up to it. At first I could see no reason for his frantic
behaviour. The twilight had now come, the stars were little and faint,
but the pit was illuminated by the flickering green fire that came from
the aluminium-making. The whole picture was a flickering scheme of
green gleams and shifting rusty black shadows, strangely trying to the
eyes. Over and through it all went the bats, heeding it not at all. The
sprawling Martians were no longer to be seen, the mound of blue-green
powder had risen to cover them from sight, and a fighting-machine, with
its legs contracted, crumpled, and abbreviated, stood across the corner
of the pit. And then, amid the clangour of the machinery, came a
drifting suspicion of human voices, that I entertained at first only to
dismiss.

I crouched, watching this fighting-machine closely, satisfying myself
now for the first time that the hood did indeed contain a Martian. As
the green flames lifted I could see the oily gleam of his integument
and the brightness of his eyes. And suddenly I heard a yell, and saw a
long tentacle reaching over the shoulder of the machine to the little
cage that hunched upon its back. Then something—something struggling
violently—was lifted high against the sky, a black, vague enigma
against the starlight; and as this black object came down again, I saw
by the green brightness that it was a man. For an instant he was
clearly visible. He was a stout, ruddy, middle-aged man, well dressed;
three days before, he must have been walking the world, a man of
considerable consequence. I could see his staring eyes and gleams of
light on his studs and watch chain. He vanished behind the mound, and
for a moment there was silence. And then began a shrieking and a
sustained and cheerful hooting from the Martians.

I slid down the rubbish, struggled to my feet, clapped my hands over my
ears, and bolted into the scullery. The curate, who had been crouching
silently with his arms over his head, looked up as I passed, cried out
quite loudly at my desertion of him, and came running after me.

That night, as we lurked in the scullery, balanced between our horror
and the terrible fascination this peeping had, although I felt an
urgent need of action I tried in vain to conceive some plan of escape;
but afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider our
position with great clearness. The curate, I found, was quite incapable
of discussion; this new and culminating atrocity had robbed him of all
vestiges of reason or forethought. Practically he had already sunk to
the level of an animal. But as the saying goes, I gripped myself with
both hands. It grew upon my mind, once I could face the facts, that
terrible as our position was, there was as yet no justification for
absolute despair. Our chief chance lay in the possibility of the
Martians making the pit nothing more than a temporary encampment. Or
even if they kept it permanently, they might not consider it necessary
to guard it, and a chance of escape might be afforded us. I also
weighed very carefully the possibility of our digging a way out in a
direction away from the pit, but the chances of our emerging within
sight of some sentinel fighting-machine seemed at first too great. And
I should have had to do all the digging myself. The curate would
certainly have failed me.

It was on the third day, if my memory serves me right, that I saw the
lad killed. It was the only occasion on which I actually saw the
Martians feed. After that experience I avoided the hole in the wall for
the better part of a day. I went into the scullery, removed the door,
and spent some hours digging with my hatchet as silently as possible;
but when I had made a hole about a couple of feet deep the loose earth
collapsed noisily, and I did not dare continue. I lost heart, and lay
down on the scullery floor for a long time, having no spirit even to
move. And after that I abandoned altogether the idea of escaping by
excavation.

It says much for the impression the Martians had made upon me that at
first I entertained little or no hope of our escape being brought about
by their overthrow through any human effort. But on the fourth or fifth
night I heard a sound like heavy guns.

It was very late in the night, and the moon was shining brightly. The
Martians had taken away the excavating-machine, and, save for a
fighting-machine that stood in the remoter bank of the pit and a
handling-machine that was buried out of my sight in a corner of the pit
immediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted by them. Except
for the pale glow from the handling-machine and the bars and patches of
white moonlight the pit was in darkness, and, except for the clinking
of the handling-machine, quite still. That night was a beautiful
serenity; save for one planet, the moon seemed to have the sky to
herself. I heard a dog howling, and that familiar sound it was that
made me listen. Then I heard quite distinctly a booming exactly like
the sound of great guns. Six distinct reports I counted, and after a
long interval six again. And that was all.




IV.
THE DEATH OF THE CURATE.


It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I peeped for the last
time, and presently found myself alone. Instead of keeping close to me
and trying to oust me from the slit, the curate had gone back into the
scullery. I was struck by a sudden thought. I went back quickly and
quietly into the scullery. In the darkness I heard the curate drinking.
I snatched in the darkness, and my fingers caught a bottle of burgundy.

For a few minutes there was a tussle. The bottle struck the floor and
broke, and I desisted and rose. We stood panting and threatening each
other. In the end I planted myself between him and the food, and told
him of my determination to begin a discipline. I divided the food in
the pantry, into rations to last us ten days. I would not let him eat
any more that day. In the afternoon he made a feeble effort to get at
the food. I had been dozing, but in an instant I was awake. All day and
all night we sat face to face, I weary but resolute, and he weeping and
complaining of his immediate hunger. It was, I know, a night and a day,
but to me it seemed—it seems now—an interminable length of time.

And so our widened incompatibility ended at last in open conflict. For
two vast days we struggled in undertones and wrestling contests. There
were times when I beat and kicked him madly, times when I cajoled and
persuaded him, and once I tried to bribe him with the last bottle of
burgundy, for there was a rain-water pump from which I could get water.
But neither force nor kindness availed; he was indeed beyond reason. He
would neither desist from his attacks on the food nor from his noisy
babbling to himself. The rudimentary precautions to keep our
imprisonment endurable he would not observe. Slowly I began to realise
the complete overthrow of his intelligence, to perceive that my sole
companion in this close and sickly darkness was a man insane.

From certain vague memories I am inclined to think my own mind wandered
at times. I had strange and hideous dreams whenever I slept. It sounds
paradoxical, but I am inclined to think that the weakness and insanity
of the curate warned me, braced me, and kept me a sane man.

On the eighth day he began to talk aloud instead of whispering, and
nothing I could do would moderate his speech.

“It is just, O God!” he would say, over and over again. “It is just. On
me and mine be the punishment laid. We have sinned, we have fallen
short. There was poverty, sorrow; the poor were trodden in the dust,
and I held my peace. I preached acceptable folly—my God, what
folly!—when I should have stood up, though I died for it, and called
upon them to repent—repent! . . . Oppressors of the poor and needy . .
. ! The wine press of God!”

Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the food I withheld from
him, praying, begging, weeping, at last threatening. He began to raise
his voice—I prayed him not to. He perceived a hold on me—he threatened
he would shout and bring the Martians upon us. For a time that scared
me; but any concession would have shortened our chance of escape beyond
estimating. I defied him, although I felt no assurance that he might
not do this thing. But that day, at any rate, he did not. He talked
with his voice rising slowly, through the greater part of the eighth
and ninth days—threats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent of half-sane
and always frothy repentance for his vacant sham of God’s service, such
as made me pity him. Then he slept awhile, and began again with renewed
strength, so loudly that I must needs make him desist.

“Be still!” I implored.

He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the darkness near the
copper.

“I have been still too long,” he said, in a tone that must have reached
the pit, “and now I must bear my witness. Woe unto this unfaithful
city! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! To the inhabitants of the earth by
reason of the other voices of the trumpet——”

“Shut up!” I said, rising to my feet, and in a terror lest the Martians
should hear us. “For God’s sake——”

“Nay,” shouted the curate, at the top of his voice, standing likewise
and extending his arms. “Speak! The word of the Lord is upon me!”

In three strides he was at the door leading into the kitchen.

“I must bear my witness! I go! It has already been too long delayed.”

I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to the wall. In a
flash I was after him. I was fierce with fear. Before he was halfway
across the kitchen I had overtaken him. With one last touch of humanity
I turned the blade back and struck him with the butt. He went headlong
forward and lay stretched on the ground. I stumbled over him and stood
panting. He lay still.

Suddenly I heard a noise without, the run and smash of slipping
plaster, and the triangular aperture in the wall was darkened. I looked
up and saw the lower surface of a handling-machine coming slowly across
the hole. One of its gripping limbs curled amid the debris; another
limb appeared, feeling its way over the fallen beams. I stood
petrified, staring. Then I saw through a sort of glass plate near the
edge of the body the face, as we may call it, and the large dark eyes
of a Martian, peering, and then a long metallic snake of tentacle came
feeling slowly through the hole.

I turned by an effort, stumbled over the curate, and stopped at the
scullery door. The tentacle was now some way, two yards or more, in the
room, and twisting and turning, with queer sudden movements, this way
and that. For a while I stood fascinated by that slow, fitful advance.
Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, I forced myself across the scullery. I
trembled violently; I could scarcely stand upright. I opened the door
of the coal cellar, and stood there in the darkness staring at the
faintly lit doorway into the kitchen, and listening. Had the Martian
seen me? What was it doing now?

Something was moving to and fro there, very quietly; every now and then
it tapped against the wall, or started on its movements with a faint
metallic ringing, like the movements of keys on a split-ring. Then a
heavy body—I knew too well what—was dragged across the floor of the
kitchen towards the opening. Irresistibly attracted, I crept to the
door and peeped into the kitchen. In the triangle of bright outer
sunlight I saw the Martian, in its Briareus of a handling-machine,
scrutinizing the curate’s head. I thought at once that it would infer
my presence from the mark of the blow I had given him.

I crept back to the coal cellar, shut the door, and began to cover
myself up as much as I could, and as noiselessly as possible in the
darkness, among the firewood and coal therein. Every now and then I
paused, rigid, to hear if the Martian had thrust its tentacles through
the opening again.

Then the faint metallic jingle returned. I traced it slowly feeling
over the kitchen. Presently I heard it nearer—in the scullery, as I
judged. I thought that its length might be insufficient to reach me. I
prayed copiously. It passed, scraping faintly across the cellar door.
An age of almost intolerable suspense intervened; then I heard it
fumbling at the latch! It had found the door! The Martians understood
doors!

It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, and then the door
opened.

In the darkness I could just see the thing—like an elephant’s trunk
more than anything else—waving towards me and touching and examining
the wall, coals, wood and ceiling. It was like a black worm swaying its
blind head to and fro.

Once, even, it touched the heel of my boot. I was on the verge of
screaming; I bit my hand. For a time the tentacle was silent. I could
have fancied it had been withdrawn. Presently, with an abrupt click, it
gripped something—I thought it had me!—and seemed to go out of the
cellar again. For a minute I was not sure. Apparently it had taken a
lump of coal to examine.

I seized the opportunity of slightly shifting my position, which had
become cramped, and then listened. I whispered passionate prayers for
safety.

Then I heard the slow, deliberate sound creeping towards me again.
Slowly, slowly it drew near, scratching against the walls and tapping
the furniture.

While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the cellar door
and closed it. I heard it go into the pantry, and the biscuit-tins
rattled and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy bump against the
cellar door. Then silence that passed into an infinity of suspense.

Had it gone?

At last I decided that it had.

It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth day in the
close darkness, buried among coals and firewood, not daring even to
crawl out for the drink for which I craved. It was the eleventh day
before I ventured so far from my security.




V.
THE STILLNESS.


My first act before I went into the pantry was to fasten the door
between the kitchen and the scullery. But the pantry was empty; every
scrap of food had gone. Apparently, the Martian had taken it all on the
previous day. At that discovery I despaired for the first time. I took
no food, or no drink either, on the eleventh or the twelfth day.

At first my mouth and throat were parched, and my strength ebbed
sensibly. I sat about in the darkness of the scullery, in a state of
despondent wretchedness. My mind ran on eating. I thought I had become
deaf, for the noises of movement I had been accustomed to hear from the
pit had ceased absolutely. I did not feel strong enough to crawl
noiselessly to the peephole, or I would have gone there.

On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, taking the chance of
alarming the Martians, I attacked the creaking rain-water pump that
stood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls of blackened and
tainted rain water. I was greatly refreshed by this, and emboldened by
the fact that no enquiring tentacle followed the noise of my pumping.

During these days, in a rambling, inconclusive way, I thought much of
the curate and of the manner of his death.

On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and dozed and thought
disjointedly of eating and of vague impossible plans of escape.
Whenever I dozed I dreamt of horrible phantasms, of the death of the
curate, or of sumptuous dinners; but, asleep or awake, I felt a keen
pain that urged me to drink again and again. The light that came into
the scullery was no longer grey, but red. To my disordered imagination
it seemed the colour of blood.

On the fourteenth day I went into the kitchen, and I was surprised to
find that the fronds of the red weed had grown right across the hole in
the wall, turning the half-light of the place into a crimson-coloured
obscurity.

It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard a curious, familiar
sequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening, identified it as the
snuffing and scratching of a dog. Going into the kitchen, I saw a dog’s
nose peering in through a break among the ruddy fronds. This greatly
surprised me. At the scent of me he barked shortly.

I thought if I could induce him to come into the place quietly I should
be able, perhaps, to kill and eat him; and in any case, it would be
advisable to kill him, lest his actions attracted the attention of the
Martians.

I crept forward, saying “Good dog!” very softly; but he suddenly
withdrew his head and disappeared.

I listened—I was not deaf—but certainly the pit was still. I heard a
sound like the flutter of a bird’s wings, and a hoarse croaking, but
that was all.

For a long while I lay close to the peephole, but not daring to move
aside the red plants that obscured it. Once or twice I heard a faint
pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither on the
sand far below me, and there were more birdlike sounds, but that was
all. At length, encouraged by the silence, I looked out.

Except in the corner, where a multitude of crows hopped and fought over
the skeletons of the dead the Martians had consumed, there was not a
living thing in the pit.

I stared about me, scarcely believing my eyes. All the machinery had
gone. Save for the big mound of greyish-blue powder in one corner,
certain bars of aluminium in another, the black birds, and the
skeletons of the killed, the place was merely an empty circular pit in
the sand.

Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed, and stood upon the
mound of rubble. I could see in any direction save behind me, to the
north, and neither Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen. The
pit dropped sheerly from my feet, but a little way along the rubbish
afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins. My chance of
escape had come. I began to tremble.

I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust of desperate resolution,
and with a heart that throbbed violently, I scrambled to the top of the
mound in which I had been buried so long.

I looked about again. To the northward, too, no Martian was visible.

When I had last seen this part of Sheen in the daylight it had been a
straggling street of comfortable white and red houses, interspersed
with abundant shady trees. Now I stood on a mound of smashed brickwork,
clay, and gravel, over which spread a multitude of red cactus-shaped
plants, knee-high, without a solitary terrestrial growth to dispute
their footing. The trees near me were dead and brown, but further a
network of red thread scaled the still living stems.

The neighbouring houses had all been wrecked, but none had been burned;
their walls stood, sometimes to the second story, with smashed windows
and shattered doors. The red weed grew tumultuously in their roofless
rooms. Below me was the great pit, with the crows struggling for its
refuse. A number of other birds hopped about among the ruins. Far away
I saw a gaunt cat slink crouchingly along a wall, but traces of men
there were none.

The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement, dazzlingly
bright, the sky a glowing blue. A gentle breeze kept the red weed that
covered every scrap of unoccupied ground gently swaying. And oh! the
sweetness of the air!




VI.
THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS.


For some time I stood tottering on the mound regardless of my safety.
Within that noisome den from which I had emerged I had thought with a
narrow intensity only of our immediate security. I had not realised
what had been happening to the world, had not anticipated this
startling vision of unfamiliar things. I had expected to see Sheen in
ruins—I found about me the landscape, weird and lurid, of another
planet.

For that moment I touched an emotion beyond the common range of men,
yet one that the poor brutes we dominate know only too well. I felt as
a rabbit might feel returning to his burrow and suddenly confronted by
the work of a dozen busy navvies digging the foundations of a house. I
felt the first inkling of a thing that presently grew quite clear in my
mind, that oppressed me for many days, a sense of dethronement, a
persuasion that I was no longer a master, but an animal among the
animals, under the Martian heel. With us it would be as with them, to
lurk and watch, to run and hide; the fear and empire of man had passed
away.

But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed, and my
dominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast. In the
direction away from the pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patch
of garden ground unburied. This gave me a hint, and I went knee-deep,
and sometimes neck-deep, in the red weed. The density of the weed gave
me a reassuring sense of hiding. The wall was some six feet high, and
when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to the
crest. So I went along by the side of it, and came to a corner and a
rockwork that enabled me to get to the top, and tumble into the garden
I coveted. Here I found some young onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs,
and a quantity of immature carrots, all of which I secured, and,
scrambling over a ruined wall, went on my way through scarlet and
crimson trees towards Kew—it was like walking through an avenue of
gigantic blood drops—possessed with two ideas: to get more food, and to
limp, as soon and as far as my strength permitted, out of this accursed
unearthly region of the pit.

Some way farther, in a grassy place, was a group of mushrooms which
also I devoured, and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing shallow
water, where meadows used to be. These fragments of nourishment served
only to whet my hunger. At first I was surprised at this flood in a
hot, dry summer, but afterwards I discovered that it was caused by the
tropical exuberance of the red weed. Directly this extraordinary growth
encountered water it straightway became gigantic and of unparalleled
fecundity. Its seeds were simply poured down into the water of the Wey
and Thames, and its swiftly growing and Titanic water fronds speedily
choked both those rivers.

At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge was almost lost in a tangle
of this weed, and at Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in a broad
and shallow stream across the meadows of Hampton and Twickenham. As the
water spread the weed followed them, until the ruined villas of the
Thames valley were for a time lost in this red swamp, whose margin I
explored, and much of the desolation the Martians had caused was
concealed.

In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly as it had spread. A
cankering disease, due, it is believed, to the action of certain
bacteria, presently seized upon it. Now by the action of natural
selection, all terrestrial plants have acquired a resisting power
against bacterial diseases—they never succumb without a severe
struggle, but the red weed rotted like a thing already dead. The fronds
became bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle. They broke off at the
least touch, and the waters that had stimulated their early growth
carried their last vestiges out to sea.

My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to slake my
thirst. I drank a great deal of it and, moved by an impulse, gnawed
some fronds of red weed; but they were watery, and had a sickly,
metallic taste. I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me to
wade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but the
flood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back to
Mortlake. I managed to make out the road by means of occasional ruins
of its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out of this
spate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and came
out on Putney Common.

Here the scenery changed from the strange and unfamiliar to the
wreckage of the familiar: patches of ground exhibited the devastation
of a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would come upon perfectly
undisturbed spaces, houses with their blinds trimly drawn and doors
closed, as if they had been left for a day by the owners, or as if
their inhabitants slept within. The red weed was less abundant; the
tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper. I hunted for
food among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple of
silent houses, but they had already been broken into and ransacked. I
rested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in my
enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.

All this time I saw no human beings, and no signs of the Martians. I
encountered a couple of hungry-looking dogs, but both hurried
circuitously away from the advances I made them. Near Roehampton I had
seen two human skeletons—not bodies, but skeletons, picked clean—and in
the wood by me I found the crushed and scattered bones of several cats
and rabbits and the skull of a sheep. But though I gnawed parts of
these in my mouth, there was nothing to be got from them.

After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, where I
think the Heat-Ray must have been used for some reason. And in the
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,
sufficient to stay my hunger. From this garden one looked down upon
Putney and the river. The aspect of the place in the dusk was
singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and
down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with the
weed. And over all—silence. It filled me with indescribable terror to
think how swiftly that desolating change had come.

For a time I believed that mankind had been swept out of existence, and
that I stood there alone, the last man left alive. Hard by the top of
Putney Hill I came upon another skeleton, with the arms dislocated and
removed several yards from the rest of the body. As I proceeded I
became more and more convinced that the extermination of mankind was,
save for such stragglers as myself, already accomplished in this part
of the world. The Martians, I thought, had gone on and left the country
desolated, seeking food elsewhere. Perhaps even now they were
destroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone northward.




VII.
THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL.


I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney Hill,
sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight to
Leatherhead. I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking into
that house—afterwards I found the front door was on the latch—nor how I
ransacked every room for food, until just on the verge of despair, in
what seemed to me to be a servant’s bedroom, I found a rat-gnawed crust
and two tins of pineapple. The place had been already searched and
emptied. In the bar I afterwards found some biscuits and sandwiches
that had been overlooked. The latter I could not eat, they were too
rotten, but the former not only stayed my hunger, but filled my
pockets. I lit no lamps, fearing some Martian might come beating that
part of London for food in the night. Before I went to bed I had an
interval of restlessness, and prowled from window to window, peering
out for some sign of these monsters. I slept little. As I lay in bed I
found myself thinking consecutively—a thing I do not remember to have
done since my last argument with the curate. During all the intervening
time my mental condition had been a hurrying succession of vague
emotional states or a sort of stupid receptivity. But in the night my
brain, reinforced, I suppose, by the food I had eaten, grew clear
again, and I thought.

Three things struggled for possession of my mind: the killing of the
curate, the whereabouts of the Martians, and the possible fate of my
wife. The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to recall; I
saw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely disagreeable but
quite without the quality of remorse. I saw myself then as I see myself
now, driven step by step towards that hasty blow, the creature of a
sequence of accidents leading inevitably to that. I felt no
condemnation; yet the memory, static, unprogressive, haunted me. In the
silence of the night, with that sense of the nearness of God that
sometimes comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my trial,
my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear. I retraced every step
of our conversation from the moment when I had found him crouching
beside me, heedless of my thirst, and pointing to the fire and smoke
that streamed up from the ruins of Weybridge. We had been incapable of
co-operation—grim chance had taken no heed of that. Had I foreseen, I
should have left him at Halliford. But I did not foresee; and crime is
to foresee and do. And I set this down as I have set all this story
down, as it was. There were no witnesses—all these things I might have
concealed. But I set it down, and the reader must form his judgment as
he will.

And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a prostrate
body, I faced the problem of the Martians and the fate of my wife. For
the former I had no data; I could imagine a hundred things, and so,
unhappily, I could for the latter. And suddenly that night became
terrible. I found myself sitting up in bed, staring at the dark. I
found myself praying that the Heat-Ray might have suddenly and
painlessly struck her out of being. Since the night of my return from
Leatherhead I had not prayed. I had uttered prayers, fetish prayers,
had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now I
prayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face with the
darkness of God. Strange night! Strangest in this, that so soon as dawn
had come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of the house like a rat
leaving its hiding place—a creature scarcely larger, an inferior
animal, a thing that for any passing whim of our masters might be
hunted and killed. Perhaps they also prayed confidently to God. Surely,
if we have learned nothing else, this war has taught us pity—pity for
those witless souls that suffer our dominion.

The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink, and
was fretted with little golden clouds. In the road that runs from the
top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a number of poor vestiges of the
panic torrent that must have poured Londonward on the Sunday night
after the fighting began. There was a little two-wheeled cart inscribed
with the name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer, New Malden, with a smashed
wheel and an abandoned tin trunk; there was a straw hat trampled into
the now hardened mud, and at the top of West Hill a lot of
blood-stained glass about the overturned water trough. My movements
were languid, my plans of the vaguest. I had an idea of going to
Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the poorest chance of
finding my wife. Certainly, unless death had overtaken them suddenly,
my cousins and she would have fled thence; but it seemed to me I might
find or learn there whither the Surrey people had fled. I knew I wanted
to find my wife, that my heart ached for her and the world of men, but
I had no clear idea how the finding might be done. I was also sharply
aware now of my intense loneliness. From the corner I went, under cover
of a thicket of trees and bushes, to the edge of Wimbledon Common,
stretching wide and far.

That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom; there
was no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on the verge
of the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and vitality. I
came upon a busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place among the
trees. I stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from their stout
resolve to live. And presently, turning suddenly, with an odd feeling
of being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a clump of bushes.
I stood regarding this. I made a step towards it, and it rose up and
became a man armed with a cutlass. I approached him slowly. He stood
silent and motionless, regarding me.

As I drew nearer I perceived he was dressed in clothes as dusty and
filthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as though he had been dragged
through a culvert. Nearer, I distinguished the green slime of ditches
mixing with the pale drab of dried clay and shiny, coaly patches. His
black hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark and dirty and
sunken, so that at first I did not recognise him. There was a red cut
across the lower part of his face.

“Stop!” he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I stopped.
His voice was hoarse. “Where do you come from?” he said.

I thought, surveying him.

“I come from Mortlake,” I said. “I was buried near the pit the Martians
made about their cylinder. I have worked my way out and escaped.”

“There is no food about here,” he said. “This is my country. All this
hill down to the river, and back to Clapham, and up to the edge of the
common. There is only food for one. Which way are you going?”

I answered slowly.

“I don’t know,” I said. “I have been buried in the ruins of a house
thirteen or fourteen days. I don’t know what has happened.”

He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and looked with a changed
expression.

“I’ve no wish to stop about here,” said I. “I think I shall go to
Leatherhead, for my wife was there.”

He shot out a pointing finger.

“It is you,” said he; “the man from Woking. And you weren’t killed at
Weybridge?”

I recognised him at the same moment.

“You are the artilleryman who came into my garden.”

“Good luck!” he said. “We are lucky ones! Fancy _you_!” He put out a
hand, and I took it. “I crawled up a drain,” he said. “But they didn’t
kill everyone. And after they went away I got off towards Walton across
the fields. But—— It’s not sixteen days altogether—and your hair is
grey.” He looked over his shoulder suddenly. “Only a rook,” he said.
“One gets to know that birds have shadows these days. This is a bit
open. Let us crawl under those bushes and talk.”

“Have you seen any Martians?” I said. “Since I crawled out——”

“They’ve gone away across London,” he said. “I guess they’ve got a
bigger camp there. Of a night, all over there, Hampstead way, the sky
is alive with their lights. It’s like a great city, and in the glare
you can just see them moving. By daylight you can’t. But nearer—I
haven’t seen them—” (he counted on his fingers) “five days. Then I saw
a couple across Hammersmith way carrying something big. And the night
before last”—he stopped and spoke impressively—“it was just a matter of
lights, but it was something up in the air. I believe they’ve built a
flying-machine, and are learning to fly.”

I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the bushes.

“Fly!”

“Yes,” he said, “fly.”

I went on into a little bower, and sat down.

“It is all over with humanity,” I said. “If they can do that they will
simply go round the world.”

He nodded.

“They will. But—— It will relieve things over here a bit. And
besides——” He looked at me. “Aren’t you satisfied it _is_ up with
humanity? I am. We’re down; we’re beat.”

I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at this fact—a fact
perfectly obvious so soon as he spoke. I had still held a vague hope;
rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of mind. He repeated his words,
“We’re beat.” They carried absolute conviction.

“It’s all over,” he said. “They’ve lost _one_—just _one_. And they’ve
made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world.
They’ve walked over us. The death of that one at Weybridge was an
accident. And these are only pioneers. They kept on coming. These green
stars—I’ve seen none these five or six days, but I’ve no doubt they’re
falling somewhere every night. Nothing’s to be done. We’re under! We’re
beat!”

I made him no answer. I sat staring before me, trying in vain to devise
some countervailing thought.

“This isn’t a war,” said the artilleryman. “It never was a war, any
more than there’s war between man and ants.”

Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory.

“After the tenth shot they fired no more—at least, until the first
cylinder came.”

“How do you know?” said the artilleryman. I explained. He thought.
“Something wrong with the gun,” he said. “But what if there is? They’ll
get it right again. And even if there’s a delay, how can it alter the
end? It’s just men and ants. There’s the ants builds their cities, live
their lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want them out of the
way, and then they go out of the way. That’s what we are now—just ants.
Only——”

“Yes,” I said.

“We’re eatable ants.”

We sat looking at each other.

“And what will they do with us?” I said.

“That’s what I’ve been thinking,” he said; “that’s what I’ve been
thinking. After Weybridge I went south—thinking. I saw what was up.
Most of the people were hard at it squealing and exciting themselves.
But I’m not so fond of squealing. I’ve been in sight of death once or
twice; I’m not an ornamental soldier, and at the best and worst,
death—it’s just death. And it’s the man that keeps on thinking comes
through. I saw everyone tracking away south. Says I, ‘Food won’t last
this way,’ and I turned right back. I went for the Martians like a
sparrow goes for man. All round”—he waved a hand to the
horizon—“they’re starving in heaps, bolting, treading on each other. .
. .”

He saw my face, and halted awkwardly.

“No doubt lots who had money have gone away to France,” he said. He
seemed to hesitate whether to apologise, met my eyes, and went on:
“There’s food all about here. Canned things in shops; wines, spirits,
mineral waters; and the water mains and drains are empty. Well, I was
telling you what I was thinking. ‘Here’s intelligent things,’ I said,
‘and it seems they want us for food. First, they’ll smash us up—ships,
machines, guns, cities, all the order and organisation. All that will
go. If we were the size of ants we might pull through. But we’re not.
It’s all too bulky to stop. That’s the first certainty.’ Eh?”

I assented.

“It is; I’ve thought it out. Very well, then—next; at present we’re
caught as we’re wanted. A Martian has only to go a few miles to get a
crowd on the run. And I saw one, one day, out by Wandsworth, picking
houses to pieces and routing among the wreckage. But they won’t keep on
doing that. So soon as they’ve settled all our guns and ships, and
smashed our railways, and done all the things they are doing over
there, they will begin catching us systematic, picking the best and
storing us in cages and things. That’s what they will start doing in a
bit. Lord! They haven’t begun on us yet. Don’t you see that?”

“Not begun!” I exclaimed.

“Not begun. All that’s happened so far is through our not having the
sense to keep quiet—worrying them with guns and such foolery. And
losing our heads, and rushing off in crowds to where there wasn’t any
more safety than where we were. They don’t want to bother us yet.
They’re making their things—making all the things they couldn’t bring
with them, getting things ready for the rest of their people. Very
likely that’s why the cylinders have stopped for a bit, for fear of
hitting those who are here. And instead of our rushing about blind, on
the howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of busting them up, we’ve
got to fix ourselves up according to the new state of affairs. That’s
how I figure it out. It isn’t quite according to what a man wants for
his species, but it’s about what the facts point to. And that’s the
principle I acted upon. Cities, nations, civilisation, progress—it’s
all over. That game’s up. We’re beat.”

“But if that is so, what is there to live for?”

The artilleryman looked at me for a moment.

“There won’t be any more blessed concerts for a million years or so;
there won’t be any Royal Academy of Arts, and no nice little feeds at
restaurants. If it’s amusement you’re after, I reckon the game is up.
If you’ve got any drawing-room manners or a dislike to eating peas with
a knife or dropping aitches, you’d better chuck ’em away. They ain’t no
further use.”

“You mean——”

“I mean that men like me are going on living—for the sake of the breed.
I tell you, I’m grim set on living. And if I’m not mistaken, you’ll
show what insides _you’ve_ got, too, before long. We aren’t going to be
exterminated. And I don’t mean to be caught either, and tamed and
fattened and bred like a thundering ox. Ugh! Fancy those brown
creepers!”

“You don’t mean to say——”

“I do. I’m going on, under their feet. I’ve got it planned; I’ve
thought it out. We men are beat. We don’t know enough. We’ve got to
learn before we’ve got a chance. And we’ve got to live and keep
independent while we learn. See! That’s what has to be done.”

I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly by the man’s resolution.

“Great God!” cried I. “But you are a man indeed!” And suddenly I
gripped his hand.

“Eh!” he said, with his eyes shining. “I’ve thought it out, eh?”

“Go on,” I said.

“Well, those who mean to escape their catching must get ready. I’m
getting ready. Mind you, it isn’t all of us that are made for wild
beasts; and that’s what it’s got to be. That’s why I watched you. I had
my doubts. You’re slender. I didn’t know that it was you, you see, or
just how you’d been buried. All these—the sort of people that lived in
these houses, and all those damn little clerks that used to live down
_that_ way—they’d be no good. They haven’t any spirit in them—no proud
dreams and no proud lusts; and a man who hasn’t one or the other—Lord!
What is he but funk and precautions? They just used to skedaddle off to
work—I’ve seen hundreds of ’em, bit of breakfast in hand, running wild
and shining to catch their little season-ticket train, for fear they’d
get dismissed if they didn’t; working at businesses they were afraid to
take the trouble to understand; skedaddling back for fear they wouldn’t
be in time for dinner; keeping indoors after dinner for fear of the
back streets, and sleeping with the wives they married, not because
they wanted them, but because they had a bit of money that would make
for safety in their one little miserable skedaddle through the world.
Lives insured and a bit invested for fear of accidents. And on
Sundays—fear of the hereafter. As if hell was built for rabbits! Well,
the Martians will just be a godsend to these. Nice roomy cages,
fattening food, careful breeding, no worry. After a week or so chasing
about the fields and lands on empty stomachs, they’ll come and be
caught cheerful. They’ll be quite glad after a bit. They’ll wonder what
people did before there were Martians to take care of them. And the bar
loafers, and mashers, and singers—I can imagine them. I can imagine
them,” he said, with a sort of sombre gratification. “There’ll be any
amount of sentiment and religion loose among them. There’s hundreds of
things I saw with my eyes that I’ve only begun to see clearly these
last few days. There’s lots will take things as they are—fat and
stupid; and lots will be worried by a sort of feeling that it’s all
wrong, and that they ought to be doing something. Now whenever things
are so that a lot of people feel they ought to be doing something, the
weak, and those who go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, always
make for a sort of do-nothing religion, very pious and superior, and
submit to persecution and the will of the Lord. Very likely you’ve seen
the same thing. It’s energy in a gale of funk, and turned clean inside
out. These cages will be full of psalms and hymns and piety. And those
of a less simple sort will work in a bit of—what is it?—eroticism.”

He paused.

“Very likely these Martians will make pets of some of them; train them
to do tricks—who knows?—get sentimental over the pet boy who grew up
and had to be killed. And some, maybe, they will train to hunt us.”

“No,” I cried, “that’s impossible! No human being——”

“What’s the good of going on with such lies?” said the artilleryman.
“There’s men who’d do it cheerful. What nonsense to pretend there
isn’t!”

And I succumbed to his conviction.

“If they come after me,” he said; “Lord, if they come after me!” and
subsided into a grim meditation.

I sat contemplating these things. I could find nothing to bring against
this man’s reasoning. In the days before the invasion no one would have
questioned my intellectual superiority to his—I, a professed and
recognised writer on philosophical themes, and he, a common soldier;
and yet he had already formulated a situation that I had scarcely
realised.

“What are you doing?” I said presently. “What plans have you made?”

He hesitated.

“Well, it’s like this,” he said. “What have we to do? We have to invent
a sort of life where men can live and breed, and be sufficiently secure
to bring the children up. Yes—wait a bit, and I’ll make it clearer what
I think ought to be done. The tame ones will go like all tame beasts;
in a few generations they’ll be big, beautiful, rich-blooded,
stupid—rubbish! The risk is that we who keep wild will go
savage—degenerate into a sort of big, savage rat. . . . You see, how I
mean to live is underground. I’ve been thinking about the drains. Of
course those who don’t know drains think horrible things; but under
this London are miles and miles—hundreds of miles—and a few days rain
and London empty will leave them sweet and clean. The main drains are
big enough and airy enough for anyone. Then there’s cellars, vaults,
stores, from which bolting passages may be made to the drains. And the
railway tunnels and subways. Eh? You begin to see? And we form a
band—able-bodied, clean-minded men. We’re not going to pick up any
rubbish that drifts in. Weaklings go out again.”

“As you meant me to go?”

“Well—I parleyed, didn’t I?”

“We won’t quarrel about that. Go on.”

“Those who stop obey orders. Able-bodied, clean-minded women we want
also—mothers and teachers. No lackadaisical ladies—no blasted rolling
eyes. We can’t have any weak or silly. Life is real again, and the
useless and cumbersome and mischievous have to die. They ought to die.
They ought to be willing to die. It’s a sort of disloyalty, after all,
to live and taint the race. And they can’t be happy. Moreover, dying’s
none so dreadful; it’s the funking makes it bad. And in all those
places we shall gather. Our district will be London. And we may even be
able to keep a watch, and run about in the open when the Martians keep
away. Play cricket, perhaps. That’s how we shall save the race. Eh?
It’s a possible thing? But saving the race is nothing in itself. As I
say, that’s only being rats. It’s saving our knowledge and adding to it
is the thing. There men like you come in. There’s books, there’s
models. We must make great safe places down deep, and get all the books
we can; not novels and poetry swipes, but ideas, science books. That’s
where men like you come in. We must go to the British Museum and pick
all those books through. Especially we must keep up our science—learn
more. We must watch these Martians. Some of us must go as spies. When
it’s all working, perhaps I will. Get caught, I mean. And the great
thing is, we must leave the Martians alone. We mustn’t even steal. If
we get in their way, we clear out. We must show them we mean no harm.
Yes, I know. But they’re intelligent things, and they won’t hunt us
down if they have all they want, and think we’re just harmless vermin.”

The artilleryman paused and laid a brown hand upon my arm.

“After all, it may not be so much we may have to learn before—Just
imagine this: four or five of their fighting machines suddenly starting
off—Heat-Rays right and left, and not a Martian in ’em. Not a Martian
in ’em, but men—men who have learned the way how. It may be in my time,
even—those men. Fancy having one of them lovely things, with its
Heat-Ray wide and free! Fancy having it in control! What would it
matter if you smashed to smithereens at the end of the run, after a
bust like that? I reckon the Martians’ll open their beautiful eyes!
Can’t you see them, man? Can’t you see them hurrying, hurrying—puffing
and blowing and hooting to their other mechanical affairs? Something
out of gear in every case. And swish, bang, rattle, swish! Just as they
are fumbling over it, _swish_ comes the Heat-Ray, and, behold! man has
come back to his own.”

For a while the imaginative daring of the artilleryman, and the tone of
assurance and courage he assumed, completely dominated my mind. I
believed unhesitatingly both in his forecast of human destiny and in
the practicability of his astonishing scheme, and the reader who thinks
me susceptible and foolish must contrast his position, reading steadily
with all his thoughts about his subject, and mine, crouching fearfully
in the bushes and listening, distracted by apprehension. We talked in
this manner through the early morning time, and later crept out of the
bushes, and, after scanning the sky for Martians, hurried precipitately
to the house on Putney Hill where he had made his lair. It was the coal
cellar of the place, and when I saw the work he had spent a week
upon—it was a burrow scarcely ten yards long, which he designed to
reach to the main drain on Putney Hill—I had my first inkling of the
gulf between his dreams and his powers. Such a hole I could have dug in
a day. But I believed in him sufficiently to work with him all that
morning until past midday at his digging. We had a garden barrow and
shot the earth we removed against the kitchen range. We refreshed
ourselves with a tin of mock-turtle soup and wine from the neighbouring
pantry. I found a curious relief from the aching strangeness of the
world in this steady labour. As we worked, I turned his project over in
my mind, and presently objections and doubts began to arise; but I
worked there all the morning, so glad was I to find myself with a
purpose again. After working an hour I began to speculate on the
distance one had to go before the cloaca was reached, the chances we
had of missing it altogether. My immediate trouble was why we should
dig this long tunnel, when it was possible to get into the drain at
once down one of the manholes, and work back to the house. It seemed to
me, too, that the house was inconveniently chosen, and required a
needless length of tunnel. And just as I was beginning to face these
things, the artilleryman stopped digging, and looked at me.

“We’re working well,” he said. He put down his spade. “Let us knock off
a bit” he said. “I think it’s time we reconnoitred from the roof of the
house.”

I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his spade;
and then suddenly I was struck by a thought. I stopped, and so did he
at once.

“Why were you walking about the common,” I said, “instead of being
here?”

“Taking the air,” he said. “I was coming back. It’s safer by night.”

“But the work?”

“Oh, one can’t always work,” he said, and in a flash I saw the man
plain. He hesitated, holding his spade. “We ought to reconnoitre now,”
he said, “because if any come near they may hear the spades and drop
upon us unawares.”

I was no longer disposed to object. We went together to the roof and
stood on a ladder peeping out of the roof door. No Martians were to be
seen, and we ventured out on the tiles, and slipped down under shelter
of the parapet.

From this position a shrubbery hid the greater portion of Putney, but
we could see the river below, a bubbly mass of red weed, and the low
parts of Lambeth flooded and red. The red creeper swarmed up the trees
about the old palace, and their branches stretched gaunt and dead, and
set with shrivelled leaves, from amid its clusters. It was strange how
entirely dependent both these things were upon flowing water for their
propagation. About us neither had gained a footing; laburnums, pink
mays, snowballs, and trees of arbor-vitae, rose out of laurels and
hydrangeas, green and brilliant into the sunlight. Beyond Kensington
dense smoke was rising, and that and a blue haze hid the northward
hills.

The artilleryman began to tell me of the sort of people who still
remained in London.

“One night last week,” he said, “some fools got the electric light in
order, and there was all Regent Street and the Circus ablaze, crowded
with painted and ragged drunkards, men and women, dancing and shouting
till dawn. A man who was there told me. And as the day came they became
aware of a fighting-machine standing near by the Langham and looking
down at them. Heaven knows how long he had been there. It must have
given some of them a nasty turn. He came down the road towards them,
and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk or frightened to run away.”

Grotesque gleam of a time no history will ever fully describe!

From that, in answer to my questions, he came round to his grandiose
plans again. He grew enthusiastic. He talked so eloquently of the
possibility of capturing a fighting-machine that I more than half
believed in him again. But now that I was beginning to understand
something of his quality, I could divine the stress he laid on doing
nothing precipitately. And I noted that now there was no question that
he personally was to capture and fight the great machine.

After a time we went down to the cellar. Neither of us seemed disposed
to resume digging, and when he suggested a meal, I was nothing loath.
He became suddenly very generous, and when we had eaten he went away
and returned with some excellent cigars. We lit these, and his optimism
glowed. He was inclined to regard my coming as a great occasion.

“There’s some champagne in the cellar,” he said.

“We can dig better on this Thames-side burgundy,” said I.

“No,” said he; “I am host today. Champagne! Great God! We’ve a heavy
enough task before us! Let us take a rest and gather strength while we
may. Look at these blistered hands!”

And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon playing cards
after we had eaten. He taught me euchre, and after dividing London
between us, I taking the northern side and he the southern, we played
for parish points. Grotesque and foolish as this will seem to the sober
reader, it is absolutely true, and what is more remarkable, I found the
card game and several others we played extremely interesting.

Strange mind of man! that, with our species upon the edge of
extermination or appalling degradation, with no clear prospect before
us but the chance of a horrible death, we could sit following the
chance of this painted pasteboard, and playing the “joker” with vivid
delight. Afterwards he taught me poker, and I beat him at three tough
chess games. When dark came we decided to take the risk, and lit a
lamp.

After an interminable string of games, we supped, and the artilleryman
finished the champagne. We went on smoking the cigars. He was no longer
the energetic regenerator of his species I had encountered in the
morning. He was still optimistic, but it was a less kinetic, a more
thoughtful optimism. I remember he wound up with my health, proposed in
a speech of small variety and considerable intermittence. I took a
cigar, and went upstairs to look at the lights of which he had spoken
that blazed so greenly along the Highgate hills.

At first I stared unintelligently across the London valley. The
northern hills were shrouded in darkness; the fires near Kensington
glowed redly, and now and then an orange-red tongue of flame flashed up
and vanished in the deep blue night. All the rest of London was black.
Then, nearer, I perceived a strange light, a pale, violet-purple
fluorescent glow, quivering under the night breeze. For a space I could
not understand it, and then I knew that it must be the red weed from
which this faint irradiation proceeded. With that realisation my
dormant sense of wonder, my sense of the proportion of things, awoke
again. I glanced from that to Mars, red and clear, glowing high in the
west, and then gazed long and earnestly at the darkness of Hampstead
and Highgate.

I remained a very long time upon the roof, wondering at the grotesque
changes of the day. I recalled my mental states from the midnight
prayer to the foolish card-playing. I had a violent revulsion of
feeling. I remember I flung away the cigar with a certain wasteful
symbolism. My folly came to me with glaring exaggeration. I seemed a
traitor to my wife and to my kind; I was filled with remorse. I
resolved to leave this strange undisciplined dreamer of great things to
his drink and gluttony, and to go on into London. There, it seemed to
me, I had the best chance of learning what the Martians and my
fellowmen were doing. I was still upon the roof when the late moon
rose.




VIII.
DEAD LONDON.


After I had parted from the artilleryman, I went down the hill, and by
the High Street across the bridge to Fulham. The red weed was
tumultuous at that time, and nearly choked the bridge roadway; but its
fronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease that
presently removed it so swiftly.

At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney Bridge station I found a
man lying. He was as black as a sweep with the black dust, alive, but
helplessly and speechlessly drunk. I could get nothing from him but
curses and furious lunges at my head. I think I should have stayed by
him but for the brutal expression of his face.

There was black dust along the roadway from the bridge onwards, and it
grew thicker in Fulham. The streets were horribly quiet. I got
food—sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite eatable—in a baker’s shop here.
Some way towards Walham Green the streets became clear of powder, and I
passed a white terrace of houses on fire; the noise of the burning was
an absolute relief. Going on towards Brompton, the streets were quiet
again.

Here I came once more upon the black powder in the streets and upon
dead bodies. I saw altogether about a dozen in the length of the Fulham
Road. They had been dead many days, so that I hurried quickly past
them. The black powder covered them over, and softened their outlines.
One or two had been disturbed by dogs.

Where there was no black powder, it was curiously like a Sunday in the
City, with the closed shops, the houses locked up and the blinds drawn,
the desertion, and the stillness. In some places plunderers had been at
work, but rarely at other than the provision and wine shops. A
jeweller’s window had been broken open in one place, but apparently the
thief had been disturbed, and a number of gold chains and a watch lay
scattered on the pavement. I did not trouble to touch them. Farther on
was a tattered woman in a heap on a doorstep; the hand that hung over
her knee was gashed and bled down her rusty brown dress, and a smashed
magnum of champagne formed a pool across the pavement. She seemed
asleep, but she was dead.

The farther I penetrated into London, the profounder grew the
stillness. But it was not so much the stillness of death—it was the
stillness of suspense, of expectation. At any time the destruction that
had already singed the northwestern borders of the metropolis, and had
annihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might strike among these houses and
leave them smoking ruins. It was a city condemned and derelict. . . .

In South Kensington the streets were clear of dead and of black powder.
It was near South Kensington that I first heard the howling. It crept
almost imperceptibly upon my senses. It was a sobbing alternation of
two notes, “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” keeping on perpetually. When I
passed streets that ran northward it grew in volume, and houses and
buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again. It came in a full tide
down Exhibition Road. I stopped, staring towards Kensington Gardens,
wondering at this strange, remote wailing. It was as if that mighty
desert of houses had found a voice for its fear and solitude.

“Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” wailed that superhuman note—great waves of
sound sweeping down the broad, sunlit roadway, between the tall
buildings on each side. I turned northwards, marvelling, towards the
iron gates of Hyde Park. I had half a mind to break into the Natural
History Museum and find my way up to the summits of the towers, in
order to see across the park. But I decided to keep to the ground,
where quick hiding was possible, and so went on up the Exhibition Road.
All the large mansions on each side of the road were empty and still,
and my footsteps echoed against the sides of the houses. At the top,
near the park gate, I came upon a strange sight—a bus overturned, and
the skeleton of a horse picked clean. I puzzled over this for a time,
and then went on to the bridge over the Serpentine. The voice grew
stronger and stronger, though I could see nothing above the housetops
on the north side of the park, save a haze of smoke to the northwest.

“Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” cried the voice, coming, as it seemed to me,
from the district about Regent’s Park. The desolating cry worked upon
my mind. The mood that had sustained me passed. The wailing took
possession of me. I found I was intensely weary, footsore, and now
again hungry and thirsty.

It was already past noon. Why was I wandering alone in this city of the
dead? Why was I alone when all London was lying in state, and in its
black shroud? I felt intolerably lonely. My mind ran on old friends
that I had forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons in the
chemists’ shops, of the liquors the wine merchants stored; I recalled
the two sodden creatures of despair, who so far as I knew, shared the
city with myself. . . .

I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and here again were black
powder and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from the gratings
of the cellars of some of the houses. I grew very thirsty after the
heat of my long walk. With infinite trouble I managed to break into a
public-house and get food and drink. I was weary after eating, and went
into the parlour behind the bar, and slept on a black horsehair sofa I
found there.

I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, “Ulla, ulla,
ulla, ulla.” It was now dusk, and after I had routed out some biscuits
and a cheese in the bar—there was a meat safe, but it contained nothing
but maggots—I wandered on through the silent residential squares to
Baker Street—Portman Square is the only one I can name—and so came out
at last upon Regent’s Park. And as I emerged from the top of Baker
Street, I saw far away over the trees in the clearness of the sunset
the hood of the Martian giant from which this howling proceeded. I was
not terrified. I came upon him as if it were a matter of course. I
watched him for some time, but he did not move. He appeared to be
standing and yelling, for no reason that I could discover.

I tried to formulate a plan of action. That perpetual sound of “Ulla,
ulla, ulla, ulla,” confused my mind. Perhaps I was too tired to be very
fearful. Certainly I was more curious to know the reason of this
monotonous crying than afraid. I turned back away from the park and
struck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went along under
the shelter of the terraces, and got a view of this stationary, howling
Martian from the direction of St. John’s Wood. A couple of hundred
yards out of Baker Street I heard a yelping chorus, and saw, first a
dog with a piece of putrescent red meat in his jaws coming headlong
towards me, and then a pack of starving mongrels in pursuit of him. He
made a wide curve to avoid me, as though he feared I might prove a
fresh competitor. As the yelping died away down the silent road, the
wailing sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” reasserted itself.

I came upon the wrecked handling-machine halfway to St. John’s Wood
station. At first I thought a house had fallen across the road. It was
only as I clambered among the ruins that I saw, with a start, this
mechanical Samson lying, with its tentacles bent and smashed and
twisted, among the ruins it had made. The forepart was shattered. It
seemed as if it had driven blindly straight at the house, and had been
overwhelmed in its overthrow. It seemed to me then that this might have
happened by a handling-machine escaping from the guidance of its
Martian. I could not clamber among the ruins to see it, and the
twilight was now so far advanced that the blood with which its seat was
smeared, and the gnawed gristle of the Martian that the dogs had left,
were invisible to me.

Wondering still more at all that I had seen, I pushed on towards
Primrose Hill. Far away, through a gap in the trees, I saw a second
Martian, as motionless as the first, standing in the park towards the
Zoological Gardens, and silent. A little beyond the ruins about the
smashed handling-machine I came upon the red weed again, and found the
Regent’s Canal, a spongy mass of dark-red vegetation.

As I crossed the bridge, the sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” ceased.
It was, as it were, cut off. The silence came like a thunderclap.

The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and dim; the trees
towards the park were growing black. All about me the red weed
clambered among the ruins, writhing to get above me in the dimness.
Night, the mother of fear and mystery, was coming upon me. But while
that voice sounded the solitude, the desolation, had been endurable; by
virtue of it London had still seemed alive, and the sense of life about
me had upheld me. Then suddenly a change, the passing of something—I
knew not what—and then a stillness that could be felt. Nothing but this
gaunt quiet.

London about me gazed at me spectrally. The windows in the white houses
were like the eye sockets of skulls. About me my imagination found a
thousand noiseless enemies moving. Terror seized me, a horror of my
temerity. In front of me the road became pitchy black as though it was
tarred, and I saw a contorted shape lying across the pathway. I could
not bring myself to go on. I turned down St. John’s Wood Road, and ran
headlong from this unendurable stillness towards Kilburn. I hid from
the night and the silence, until long after midnight, in a cabmen’s
shelter in Harrow Road. But before the dawn my courage returned, and
while the stars were still in the sky I turned once more towards
Regent’s Park. I missed my way among the streets, and presently saw
down a long avenue, in the half-light of the early dawn, the curve of
Primrose Hill. On the summit, towering up to the fading stars, was a
third Martian, erect and motionless like the others.

An insane resolve possessed me. I would die and end it. And I would
save myself even the trouble of killing myself. I marched on recklessly
towards this Titan, and then, as I drew nearer and the light grew, I
saw that a multitude of black birds was circling and clustering about
the hood. At that my heart gave a bound, and I began running along the
road.

I hurried through the red weed that choked St. Edmund’s Terrace (I
waded breast-high across a torrent of water that was rushing down from
the waterworks towards the Albert Road), and emerged upon the grass
before the rising of the sun. Great mounds had been heaped about the
crest of the hill, making a huge redoubt of it—it was the final and
largest place the Martians had made—and from behind these heaps there
rose a thin smoke against the sky. Against the sky line an eager dog
ran and disappeared. The thought that had flashed into my mind grew
real, grew credible. I felt no fear, only a wild, trembling exultation,
as I ran up the hill towards the motionless monster. Out of the hood
hung lank shreds of brown, at which the hungry birds pecked and tore.

In another moment I had scrambled up the earthen rampart and stood upon
its crest, and the interior of the redoubt was below me. A mighty space
it was, with gigantic machines here and there within it, huge mounds of
material and strange shelter places. And scattered about it, some in
their overturned war-machines, some in the now rigid handling-machines,
and a dozen of them stark and silent and laid in a row, were the
Martians—_dead_!—slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria against
which their systems were unprepared; slain as the red weed was being
slain; slain, after all man’s devices had failed, by the humblest
things that God, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth.

For so it had come about, as indeed I and many men might have foreseen
had not terror and disaster blinded our minds. These germs of disease
have taken toll of humanity since the beginning of things—taken toll of
our prehuman ancestors since life began here. But by virtue of this
natural selection of our kind we have developed resisting power; to no
germs do we succumb without a struggle, and to many—those that cause
putrefaction in dead matter, for instance—our living frames are
altogether immune. But there are no bacteria in Mars, and directly
these invaders arrived, directly they drank and fed, our microscopic
allies began to work their overthrow. Already when I watched them they
were irrevocably doomed, dying and rotting even as they went to and
fro. It was inevitable. By the toll of a billion deaths man has bought
his birthright of the earth, and it is his against all comers; it would
still be his were the Martians ten times as mighty as they are. For
neither do men live nor die in vain.

Here and there they were scattered, nearly fifty altogether, in that
great gulf they had made, overtaken by a death that must have seemed to
them as incomprehensible as any death could be. To me also at that time
this death was incomprehensible. All I knew was that these things that
had been alive and so terrible to men were dead. For a moment I
believed that the destruction of Sennacherib had been repeated, that
God had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night.

I stood staring into the pit, and my heart lightened gloriously, even
as the rising sun struck the world to fire about me with his rays. The
pit was still in darkness; the mighty engines, so great and wonderful
in their power and complexity, so unearthly in their tortuous forms,
rose weird and vague and strange out of the shadows towards the light.
A multitude of dogs, I could hear, fought over the bodies that lay
darkly in the depth of the pit, far below me. Across the pit on its
farther lip, flat and vast and strange, lay the great flying-machine
with which they had been experimenting upon our denser atmosphere when
decay and death arrested them. Death had come not a day too soon. At
the sound of a cawing overhead I looked up at the huge fighting-machine
that would fight no more for ever, at the tattered red shreds of flesh
that dripped down upon the overturned seats on the summit of Primrose
Hill.

I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where, enhaloed now
in birds, stood those other two Martians that I had seen overnight,
just as death had overtaken them. The one had died, even as it had been
crying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to die, and its voice
had gone on perpetually until the force of its machinery was exhausted.
They glittered now, harmless tripod towers of shining metal, in the
brightness of the rising sun.

All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlasting
destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities. Those who have only
seen London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke can scarcely imagine
the naked clearness and beauty of the silent wilderness of houses.

Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the Albert Terrace and the
splintered spire of the church, the sun blazed dazzling in a clear sky,
and here and there some facet in the great wilderness of roofs caught
the light and glared with a white intensity.

Northward were Kilburn and Hampsted, blue and crowded with houses;
westward the great city was dimmed; and southward, beyond the Martians,
the green waves of Regent’s Park, the Langham Hotel, the dome of the
Albert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the giant mansions of the
Brompton Road came out clear and little in the sunrise, the jagged
ruins of Westminster rising hazily beyond. Far away and blue were the
Surrey hills, and the towers of the Crystal Palace glittered like two
silver rods. The dome of St. Paul’s was dark against the sunrise, and
injured, I saw for the first time, by a huge gaping cavity on its
western side.

And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories and
churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous hopes
and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to build this
human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that had hung
over it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled back, and
that men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast dead city
of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of emotion that
was near akin to tears.

The torment was over. Even that day the healing would begin. The
survivors of the people scattered over the country—leaderless, lawless,
foodless, like sheep without a shepherd—the thousands who had fled by
sea, would begin to return; the pulse of life, growing stronger and
stronger, would beat again in the empty streets and pour across the
vacant squares. Whatever destruction was done, the hand of the
destroyer was stayed. All the gaunt wrecks, the blackened skeletons of
houses that stared so dismally at the sunlit grass of the hill, would
presently be echoing with the hammers of the restorers and ringing with
the tapping of their trowels. At the thought I extended my hands
towards the sky and began thanking God. In a year, thought I—in a year.
. . .

With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, of my wife, and the
old life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased for ever.

And now comes the strangest thing in my story. Yet, perhaps, it is not
altogether strange. I remember, clearly and coldly and vividly, all
that I did that day until the time that I stood weeping and praising
God upon the summit of Primrose Hill. And then I forget.

Of the next three days I know nothing. I have learned since that, so
far from my being the first discoverer of the Martian overthrow,
several such wanderers as myself had already discovered this on the
previous night. One man—the first—had gone to St. Martin’s-le-Grand,
and, while I sheltered in the cabmen’s hut, had contrived to telegraph
to Paris. Thence the joyful news had flashed all over the world; a
thousand cities, chilled by ghastly apprehensions, suddenly flashed
into frantic illuminations; they knew of it in Dublin, Edinburgh,
Manchester, Birmingham, at the time when I stood upon the verge of the
pit. Already men, weeping with joy, as I have heard, shouting and
staying their work to shake hands and shout, were making up trains,
even as near as Crewe, to descend upon London. The church bells that
had ceased a fortnight since suddenly caught the news, until all
England was bell-ringing. Men on cycles, lean-faced, unkempt, scorched
along every country lane shouting of unhoped deliverance, shouting to
gaunt, staring figures of despair. And for the food! Across the
Channel, across the Irish Sea, across the Atlantic, corn, bread, and
meat were tearing to our relief. All the shipping in the world seemed
going Londonward in those days. But of all this I have no memory. I
drifted—a demented man. I found myself in a house of kindly people, who
had found me on the third day wandering, weeping, and raving through
the streets of St. John’s Wood. They have told me since that I was
singing some insane doggerel about “The Last Man Left Alive! Hurrah!
The Last Man Left Alive!” Troubled as they were with their own affairs,
these people, whose name, much as I would like to express my gratitude
to them, I may not even give here, nevertheless cumbered themselves
with me, sheltered me, and protected me from myself. Apparently they
had learned something of my story from me during the days of my lapse.

Very gently, when my mind was assured again, did they break to me what
they had learned of the fate of Leatherhead. Two days after I was
imprisoned it had been destroyed, with every soul in it, by a Martian.
He had swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without any
provocation, as a boy might crush an ant hill, in the mere wantonness
of power.

I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. I was a lonely man
and a sad one, and they bore with me. I remained with them four days
after my recovery. All that time I felt a vague, a growing craving to
look once more on whatever remained of the little life that seemed so
happy and bright in my past. It was a mere hopeless desire to feast
upon my misery. They dissuaded me. They did all they could to divert me
from this morbidity. But at last I could resist the impulse no longer,
and, promising faithfully to return to them, and parting, as I will
confess, from these four-day friends with tears, I went out again into
the streets that had lately been so dark and strange and empty.

Already they were busy with returning people; in places even there were
shops open, and I saw a drinking fountain running water.

I remember how mockingly bright the day seemed as I went back on my
melancholy pilgrimage to the little house at Woking, how busy the
streets and vivid the moving life about me. So many people were abroad
everywhere, busied in a thousand activities, that it seemed incredible
that any great proportion of the population could have been slain. But
then I noticed how yellow were the skins of the people I met, how
shaggy the hair of the men, how large and bright their eyes, and that
every other man still wore his dirty rags. Their faces seemed all with
one of two expressions—a leaping exultation and energy or a grim
resolution. Save for the expression of the faces, London seemed a city
of tramps. The vestries were indiscriminately distributing bread sent
us by the French government. The ribs of the few horses showed
dismally. Haggard special constables with white badges stood at the
corners of every street. I saw little of the mischief wrought by the
Martians until I reached Wellington Street, and there I saw the red
weed clambering over the buttresses of Waterloo Bridge.

At the corner of the bridge, too, I saw one of the common contrasts of
that grotesque time—a sheet of paper flaunting against a thicket of the
red weed, transfixed by a stick that kept it in place. It was the
placard of the first newspaper to resume publication—the _Daily Mail_.
I bought a copy for a blackened shilling I found in my pocket. Most of
it was in blank, but the solitary compositor who did the thing had
amused himself by making a grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo on
the back page. The matter he printed was emotional; the news
organisation had not as yet found its way back. I learned nothing fresh
except that already in one week the examination of the Martian
mechanisms had yielded astonishing results. Among other things, the
article assured me what I did not believe at the time, that the “Secret
of Flying,” was discovered. At Waterloo I found the free trains that
were taking people to their homes. The first rush was already over.
There were few people in the train, and I was in no mood for casual
conversation. I got a compartment to myself, and sat with folded arms,
looking greyly at the sunlit devastation that flowed past the windows.
And just outside the terminus the train jolted over temporary rails,
and on either side of the railway the houses were blackened ruins. To
Clapham Junction the face of London was grimy with powder of the Black
Smoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms and rain, and at Clapham
Junction the line had been wrecked again; there were hundreds of
out-of-work clerks and shopmen working side by side with the customary
navvies, and we were jolted over a hasty relaying.

All down the line from there the aspect of the country was gaunt and
unfamiliar; Wimbledon particularly had suffered. Walton, by virtue of
its unburned pine woods, seemed the least hurt of any place along the
line. The Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a heaped mass of
red weed, in appearance between butcher’s meat and pickled cabbage. The
Surrey pine woods were too dry, however, for the festoons of the red
climber. Beyond Wimbledon, within sight of the line, in certain nursery
grounds, were the heaped masses of earth about the sixth cylinder. A
number of people were standing about it, and some sappers were busy in
the midst of it. Over it flaunted a Union Jack, flapping cheerfully in
the morning breeze. The nursery grounds were everywhere crimson with
the weed, a wide expanse of livid colour cut with purple shadows, and
very painful to the eye. One’s gaze went with infinite relief from the
scorched greys and sullen reds of the foreground to the blue-green
softness of the eastward hills.

The line on the London side of Woking station was still undergoing
repair, so I descended at Byfleet station and took the road to Maybury,
past the place where I and the artilleryman had talked to the hussars,
and on by the spot where the Martian had appeared to me in the
thunderstorm. Here, moved by curiosity, I turned aside to find, among a
tangle of red fronds, the warped and broken dog cart with the whitened
bones of the horse scattered and gnawed. For a time I stood regarding
these vestiges. . . .

Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with red weed here and
there, to find the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already found
burial, and so came home past the College Arms. A man standing at an
open cottage door greeted me by name as I passed.

I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that faded immediately.
The door had been forced; it was unfast and was opening slowly as I
approached.

It slammed again. The curtains of my study fluttered out of the open
window from which I and the artilleryman had watched the dawn. No one
had closed it since. The smashed bushes were just as I had left them
nearly four weeks ago. I stumbled into the hall, and the house felt
empty. The stair carpet was ruffled and discoloured where I had
crouched, soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm the night of the
catastrophe. Our muddy footsteps I saw still went up the stairs.

I followed them to my study, and found lying on my writing-table still,
with the selenite paper weight upon it, the sheet of work I had left on
the afternoon of the opening of the cylinder. For a space I stood
reading over my abandoned arguments. It was a paper on the probable
development of Moral Ideas with the development of the civilising
process; and the last sentence was the opening of a prophecy: “In about
two hundred years,” I had written, “we may expect——” The sentence ended
abruptly. I remembered my inability to fix my mind that morning,
scarcely a month gone by, and how I had broken off to get my _Daily
Chronicle_ from the newsboy. I remembered how I went down to the garden
gate as he came along, and how I had listened to his odd story of “Men
from Mars.”

I came down and went into the dining room. There were the mutton and
the bread, both far gone now in decay, and a beer bottle overturned,
just as I and the artilleryman had left them. My home was desolate. I
perceived the folly of the faint hope I had cherished so long. And then
a strange thing occurred. “It is no use,” said a voice. “The house is
deserted. No one has been here these ten days. Do not stay here to
torment yourself. No one escaped but you.”

I was startled. Had I spoken my thought aloud? I turned, and the French
window was open behind me. I made a step to it, and stood looking out.

And there, amazed and afraid, even as I stood amazed and afraid, were
my cousin and my wife—my wife white and tearless. She gave a faint cry.

“I came,” she said. “I knew—knew——”

She put her hand to her throat—swayed. I made a step forward, and
caught her in my arms.


I cannot but regret, now that I am concluding my story, how little I am
able to contribute to the discussion of the many debatable questions
which are still unsettled. In one respect I shall certainly provoke
criticism. My particular province is speculative philosophy. My
knowledge of comparative physiology is confined to a book or two, but
it seems to me that Carver’s suggestions as to the reason of the rapid
death of the Martians is so probable as to be regarded almost as a
proven conclusion. I have assumed that in the body of my narrative.

At any rate, in all the bodies of the Martians that were examined after
the war, no bacteria except those already known as terrestrial species
were found. That they did not bury any of their dead, and the reckless
slaughter they perpetrated, point also to an entire ignorance of the
putrefactive process. But probable as this seems, it is by no means a
proven conclusion.

Neither is the composition of the Black Smoke known, which the Martians
used with such deadly effect, and the generator of the Heat-Rays
remains a puzzle. The terrible disasters at the Ealing and South
Kensington laboratories have disinclined analysts for further
investigations upon the latter. Spectrum analysis of the black powder
points unmistakably to the presence of an unknown element with a
brilliant group of three lines in the green, and it is possible that it
combines with argon to form a compound which acts at once with deadly
effect upon some constituent in the blood. But such unproven
speculations will scarcely be of interest to the general reader, to
whom this story is addressed. None of the brown scum that drifted down
the Thames after the destruction of Shepperton was examined at the
time, and now none is forthcoming.

The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians, so far as the
prowling dogs had left such an examination possible, I have already
given. But everyone is familiar with the magnificent and almost
complete specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum, and the
countless drawings that have been made from it; and beyond that the
interest of their physiology and structure is purely scientific.

A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility of
another attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enough
attention is being given to this aspect of the matter. At present the
planet Mars is in conjunction, but with every return to opposition I,
for one, anticipate a renewal of their adventure. In any case, we
should be prepared. It seems to me that it should be possible to define
the position of the gun from which the shots are discharged, to keep a
sustained watch upon this part of the planet, and to anticipate the
arrival of the next attack.

In that case the cylinder might be destroyed with dynamite or artillery
before it was sufficiently cool for the Martians to emerge, or they
might be butchered by means of guns so soon as the screw opened. It
seems to me that they have lost a vast advantage in the failure of
their first surprise. Possibly they see it in the same light.

Lessing has advanced excellent reasons for supposing that the Martians
have actually succeeded in effecting a landing on the planet Venus.
Seven months ago now, Venus and Mars were in alignment with the sun;
that is to say, Mars was in opposition from the point of view of an
observer on Venus. Subsequently a peculiar luminous and sinuous marking
appeared on the unillumined half of the inner planet, and almost
simultaneously a faint dark mark of a similar sinuous character was
detected upon a photograph of the Martian disk. One needs to see the
drawings of these appearances in order to appreciate fully their
remarkable resemblance in character.

At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our views of
the human future must be greatly modified by these events. We have
learned now that we cannot regard this planet as being fenced in and a
secure abiding place for Man; we can never anticipate the unseen good
or evil that may come upon us suddenly out of space. It may be that in
the larger design of the universe this invasion from Mars is not
without its ultimate benefit for men; it has robbed us of that serene
confidence in the future which is the most fruitful source of
decadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are enormous, and
it has done much to promote the conception of the commonweal of
mankind. It may be that across the immensity of space the Martians have
watched the fate of these pioneers of theirs and learned their lesson,
and that on the planet Venus they have found a securer settlement. Be
that as it may, for many years yet there will certainly be no
relaxation of the eager scrutiny of the Martian disk, and those fiery
darts of the sky, the shooting stars, will bring with them as they fall
an unavoidable apprehension to all the sons of men.

The broadening of men’s views that has resulted can scarcely be
exaggerated. Before the cylinder fell there was a general persuasion
that through all the deep of space no life existed beyond the petty
surface of our minute sphere. Now we see further. If the Martians can
reach Venus, there is no reason to suppose that the thing is impossible
for men, and when the slow cooling of the sun makes this earth
uninhabitable, as at last it must do, it may be that the thread of life
that has begun here will have streamed out and caught our sister planet
within its toils.

Dim and wonderful is the vision I have conjured up in my mind of life
spreading slowly from this little seed bed of the solar system
throughout the inanimate vastness of sidereal space. But that is a
remote dream. It may be, on the other hand, that the destruction of the
Martians is only a reprieve. To them, and not to us, perhaps, is the
future ordained.

I must confess the stress and danger of the time have left an abiding
sense of doubt and insecurity in my mind. I sit in my study writing by
lamplight, and suddenly I see again the healing valley below set with
writhing flames, and feel the house behind and about me empty and
desolate. I go out into the Byfleet Road, and vehicles pass me, a
butcher boy in a cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on a bicycle,
children going to school, and suddenly they become vague and unreal,
and I hurry again with the artilleryman through the hot, brooding
silence. Of a night I see the black powder darkening the silent
streets, and the contorted bodies shrouded in that layer; they rise
upon me tattered and dog-bitten. They gibber and grow fiercer, paler,
uglier, mad distortions of humanity at last, and I wake, cold and
wretched, in the darkness of the night.

I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and the
Strand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts of the
past, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and wretched, going
to and fro, phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of life in a
galvanised body. And strange, too, it is to stand on Primrose Hill, as
I did but a day before writing this last chapter, to see the great
province of houses, dim and blue through the haze of the smoke and
mist, vanishing at last into the vague lower sky, to see the people
walking to and fro among the flower beds on the hill, to see the
sight-seers about the Martian machine that stands there still, to hear
the tumult of playing children, and to recall the time when I saw it
all bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, under the dawn of that last
great day. . . .

And strangest of all is it to hold my wife’s hand again, and to think
that I have counted her, and that she has counted me, among the dead.

  "I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first
  instructions in literature to the free grammar-schools
  established there. I therefore give one hundred pounds
  sterling to my executors, to be by them ... paid over to
  the managers or directors of the free schools in my native
  town of Boston, to be by them ... put out to interest, and
  so continued at interest forever, which interest annually
  shall be laid out in silver medals, and given as honorary
  rewards annually by the directors of the said free schools
  belonging to the said town, in such manner as to the
  discretion of the selectmen of the said town shall seem
  meet."

[Illustration: B. Franklin From an engraving by J. Thomson from the
original picture by J. A. Duplessis]

[Illustration: B. Franklin's signature]


INTRODUCTION


We Americans devour eagerly any piece of writing that purports to tell
us the secret of success in life; yet how often we are disappointed to
find nothing but commonplace statements, or receipts that we know by
heart but never follow. Most of the life stories of our famous and
successful men fail to inspire because they lack the human element
that makes the record real and brings the story within our grasp.
While we are searching far and near for some Aladdin's Lamp to give
coveted fortune, there is ready at our hand if we will only reach out
and take it, like the charm in Milton's _Comus_,

  "Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain
   Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon;"

the interesting, human, and vividly told story of one of the wisest
and most useful lives in our own history, and perhaps in any history.
In Franklin's _Autobiography_ is offered not so much a ready-made
formula for success, as the companionship of a real flesh and blood
man of extraordinary mind and quality, whose daily walk and
conversation will help us to meet our own difficulties, much as does
the example of a wise and strong friend. While we are fascinated by
the story, we absorb the human experience through which a strong and
helpful character is building.

The thing that makes Franklin's _Autobiography_ different from every
other life story of a great and successful man is just this human
aspect of the account. Franklin told the story of his life, as he
himself says, for the benefit of his posterity. He wanted to help them
by the relation of his own rise from obscurity and poverty to eminence
and wealth. He is not unmindful of the importance of his public
services and their recognition, yet his accounts of these achievements
are given only as a part of the story, and the vanity displayed is
incidental and in keeping with the honesty of the recital. There is
nothing of the impossible in the method and practice of Franklin as he
sets them forth. The youth who reads the fascinating story is
astonished to find that Franklin in his early years struggled with the
same everyday passions and difficulties that he himself experiences,
and he loses the sense of discouragement that comes from a
realization of his own shortcomings and inability to attain.

There are other reasons why the _Autobiography_ should be an intimate
friend of American young people. Here they may establish a close
relationship with one of the foremost Americans as well as one of the
wisest men of his age.

The life of Benjamin Franklin is of importance to every American
primarily because of the part he played in securing the independence
of the United States and in establishing it as a nation. Franklin
shares with Washington the honors of the Revolution, and of the events
leading to the birth of the new nation. While Washington was the
animating spirit of the struggle in the colonies, Franklin was its
ablest champion abroad. To Franklin's cogent reasoning and keen
satire, we owe the clear and forcible presentation of the American
case in England and France; while to his personality and diplomacy as
well as to his facile pen, we are indebted for the foreign alliance
and the funds without which Washington's work must have failed. His
patience, fortitude, and practical wisdom, coupled with
self-sacrificing devotion to the cause of his country, are hardly less
noticeable than similar qualities displayed by Washington. In fact,
Franklin as a public man was much like Washington, especially in the
entire disinterestedness of his public service.

Franklin is also interesting to us because by his life and teachings
he has done more than any other American to advance the material
prosperity of his countrymen. It is said that his widely and
faithfully read maxims made Philadelphia and Pennsylvania wealthy,
while Poor Richard's pithy sayings, translated into many languages,
have had a world-wide influence.

Franklin is a good type of our American manhood. Although not the
wealthiest or the most powerful, he is undoubtedly, in the versatility
of his genius and achievements, the greatest of our self-made men. The
simple yet graphic story in the _Autobiography_ of his steady rise
from humble boyhood in a tallow-chandler shop, by industry, economy,
and perseverance in self-improvement, to eminence, is the most
remarkable of all the remarkable histories of our self-made men. It is
in itself a wonderful illustration of the results possible to be
attained in a land of unequaled opportunity by following Franklin's
maxims.

Franklin's fame, however, was not confined to his own country.
Although he lived in a century notable for the rapid evolution of
scientific and political thought and activity, yet no less a keen
judge and critic than Lord Jeffrey, the famous editor of the
_Edinburgh Review_, a century ago said that "in one point of view
the name of Franklin must be considered as standing higher than any of
the others which illustrated the eighteenth century. Distinguished as
a statesman, he was equally great as a philosopher, thus uniting in
himself a rare degree of excellence in both these pursuits, to excel
in either of which is deemed the highest praise."

Franklin has indeed been aptly called "many-sided." He was eminent in
science and public service, in diplomacy and in literature. He was the
Edison of his day, turning his scientific discoveries to the benefit
of his fellow-men. He perceived the identity of lightning and
electricity and set up the lightning rod. He invented the Franklin
stove, still widely used, and refused to patent it. He possessed a
masterly shrewdness in business and practical affairs. Carlyle called
him the father of all the Yankees. He founded a fire company, assisted
in founding a hospital, and improved the cleaning and lighting of
streets. He developed journalism, established the American
Philosophical Society, the public library in Philadelphia, and the
University of Pennsylvania. He organized a postal system for the
colonies, which was the basis of the present United States Post
Office. Bancroft, the eminent historian, called him "the greatest
diplomatist of his century." He perfected the Albany Plan of Union for
the colonies. He is the only statesman who signed the Declaration of
Independence, the Treaty of Alliance with France, the Treaty of Peace
with England, and the Constitution. As a writer, he has produced, in
his _Autobiography_ and in _Poor Richard's Almanac_, two works that
are not surpassed by similar writing. He received honorary degrees
from Harvard and Yale, from Oxford and St. Andrews, and was made a
fellow of the Royal Society, which awarded him the Copley gold medal
for improving natural knowledge. He was one of the eight foreign
associates of the French Academy of Science.

The careful study of the _Autobiography_ is also valuable because of
the style in which it is written. If Robert Louis Stevenson is right
in believing that his remarkable style was acquired by imitation then
the youth who would gain the power to express his ideas clearly,
forcibly, and interestingly cannot do better than to study Franklin's
method. Franklin's fame in the scientific world was due almost as much
to his modest, simple, and sincere manner of presenting his
discoveries and to the precision and clearness of the style in which
he described his experiments, as to the results he was able to
announce. Sir Humphry Davy, the celebrated English chemist, himself an
excellent literary critic as well as a great scientist, said: "A
singular felicity guided all Franklin's researches, and by very small
means he established very grand truths. The style and manner of his
publication on electricity are almost as worthy of admiration as the
doctrine it contains."

Franklin's place in literature is hard to determine because he was not
primarily a literary man. His aim in his writings as in his life work
was to be helpful to his fellow-men. For him writing was never an end
in itself, but always a means to an end. Yet his success as a
scientist, a statesman, and a diplomat, as well as socially, was in no
little part due to his ability as a writer. "His letters charmed all,
and made his correspondence eagerly sought. His political arguments
were the joy of his party and the dread of his opponents. His
scientific discoveries were explained in language at once so simple
and so clear that plow-boy and exquisite could follow his thought or
his experiment to its conclusion."[1]

    [1] _The Many-Sided Franklin._ Paul L. Ford.

As far as American literature is concerned, Franklin has no
contemporaries. Before the _Autobiography_ only one literary work of
importance had been produced in this country--Cotton Mather's
_Magnalia_, a church history of New England in a ponderous, stiff
style. Franklin was the first American author to gain a wide and
permanent reputation in Europe. The _Autobiography_, _Poor Richard_,
_Father Abraham's Speech_ or _The Way to Wealth_, as well as some of
the _Bagatelles_, are as widely known abroad as any American writings.
Franklin must also be classed as the first American humorist.

English literature of the eighteenth century was characterized by the
development of prose. Periodical literature reached its perfection
early in the century in _The Tatler_ and _The Spectator_ of Addison
and Steele. Pamphleteers flourished throughout the period. The
homelier prose of Bunyan and Defoe gradually gave place to the more
elegant and artificial language of Samuel Johnson, who set the
standard for prose writing from 1745 onward. This century saw the
beginnings of the modern novel, in Fielding's _Tom Jones_,
Richardson's _Clarissa Harlowe_, Sterne's _Tristram Shandy_, and
Goldsmith's _Vicar of Wakefield_. Gibbon wrote _The Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire_, Hume his _History of England_, and Adam Smith
the _Wealth of Nations_.

In the simplicity and vigor of his style Franklin more nearly
resembles the earlier group of writers. In his first essays he was not
an inferior imitator of Addison. In his numerous parables, moral
allegories, and apologues he showed Bunyan's influence. But Franklin
was essentially a journalist. In his swift, terse style, he is most
like Defoe, who was the first great English journalist and master of
the newspaper narrative. The style of both writers is marked by
homely, vigorous expression, satire, burlesque, repartee. Here the
comparison must end. Defoe and his contemporaries were authors. Their
vocation was writing and their success rests on the imaginative or
creative power they displayed. To authorship Franklin laid no claim.
He wrote no work of the imagination. He developed only incidentally a
style in many respects as remarkable as that of his English
contemporaries. He wrote the best autobiography in existence, one of
the most widely known collections of maxims, and an unsurpassed series
of political and social satires, because he was a man of unusual scope
of power and usefulness, who knew how to tell his fellow-men the
secrets of that power and that usefulness.


The Story of the Autobiography

The account of how Franklin's _Autobiography_ came to be written and
of the adventures of the original manuscript forms in itself an
interesting story. The _Autobiography_ is Franklin's longest work,
and yet it is only a fragment. The first part, written as a letter to
his son, William Franklin, was not intended for publication; and the
composition is more informal and the narrative more personal than in
the second part, from 1730 on, which was written with a view to
publication. The entire manuscript shows little evidence of revision.
In fact, the expression is so homely and natural that his grandson,
William Temple Franklin, in editing the work changed some of the
phrases because he thought them inelegant and vulgar.

Franklin began the story of his life while on a visit to his friend,
Bishop Shipley, at Twyford, in Hampshire, southern England, in 1771.
He took the manuscript, completed to 1731, with him when he returned
to Philadelphia in 1775. It was left there with his other papers when
he went to France in the following year, and disappeared during the
confusion incident to the Revolution. Twenty-three pages of closely
written manuscript fell into the hands of Abel James, an old friend,
who sent a copy to Franklin at Passy, near Paris, urging him to
complete the story. Franklin took up the work at Passy in 1784 and
carried the narrative forward a few months. He changed the plan to
meet his new purpose of writing to benefit the young reader. His work
was soon interrupted and was not resumed until 1788, when he was at
home in Philadelphia. He was now old, infirm, and suffering, and was
still engaged in public service. Under these discouraging conditions
the work progressed slowly. It finally stopped when the narrative
reached the year 1757. Copies of the manuscript were sent to friends
of Franklin in England and France, among others to Monsieur Le
Veillard at Paris.

The first edition of the _Autobiography_ was published in French at
Paris in 1791. It was clumsily and carelessly translated, and was
imperfect and unfinished. Where the translator got the manuscript is
not known. Le Veillard disclaimed any knowledge of the publication.
From this faulty French edition many others were printed, some in
Germany, two in England, and another in France, so great was the
demand for the work.

In the meantime the original manuscript of the _Autobiography_ had
started on a varied and adventurous career. It was left by Franklin
with his other works to his grandson, William Temple Franklin, whom
Franklin designated as his literary executor. When Temple Franklin
came to publish his grandfather's works in 1817, he sent the original
manuscript of the _Autobiography_ to the daughter of Le Veillard in
exchange for her father's copy, probably thinking the clearer
transcript would make better printer's copy. The original manuscript
thus found its way to the Le Veillard family and connections, where it
remained until sold in 1867 to Mr. John Bigelow, United States
Minister to France. By him it was later sold to Mr. E. Dwight Church
of New York, and passed with the rest of Mr. Church's library into the
possession of Mr. Henry E. Huntington. The original manuscript of
Franklin's _Autobiography_ now rests in the vault in Mr. Huntington's
residence at Fifth Avenue and Fifty-seventh Street, New York City.

When Mr. Bigelow came to examine his purchase, he was astonished to
find that what people had been reading for years as the authentic
_Life of Benjamin Franklin by Himself_, was only a garbled and
incomplete version of the real _Autobiography_. Temple Franklin had
taken unwarranted liberties with the original. Mr. Bigelow says he
found more than twelve hundred changes in the text. In 1868,
therefore, Mr. Bigelow published the standard edition of Franklin's
_Autobiography_. It corrected errors in the previous editions and was
the first English edition to contain the short fourth part,
comprising the last few pages of the manuscript, written during the
last year of Franklin's life. Mr. Bigelow republished the
_Autobiography_, with additional interesting matter, in three volumes
in 1875, in 1905, and in 1910. The text in this volume is that of Mr.
Bigelow's editions.[2]

    [2] For the division into chapters and the chapter
    titles, however, the present editor is responsible.

The _Autobiography_ has been reprinted in the United States many
scores of times and translated into all the languages of Europe. It
has never lost its popularity and is still in constant demand at
circulating libraries. The reason for this popularity is not far to
seek. For in this work Franklin told in a remarkable manner the story
of a remarkable life. He displayed hard common sense and a practical
knowledge of the art of living. He selected and arranged his material,
perhaps unconsciously, with the unerring instinct of the journalist
for the best effects. His success is not a little due to his plain,
clear, vigorous English. He used short sentences and words, homely
expressions, apt illustrations, and pointed allusions. Franklin had a
most interesting, varied, and unusual life. He was one of the greatest
conversationalists of his time.

His book is the record of that unusual life told in Franklin's own
unexcelled conversational style. It is said that the best parts of
Boswell's famous biography of Samuel Johnson are those parts where
Boswell permits Johnson to tell his own story. In the _Autobiography_
a no less remarkable man and talker than Samuel Johnson is telling his
own story throughout.

F. W. P.

The Gilman Country School,
Baltimore, September, 1916.

[Illustration: Pages 1 and 4 of The Pennsylvania Gazette, the first
number after Franklin took control. Reduced nearly one-half.
Reproduced from a copy at the New York Public Library.]

[Transcriber's note: Transcription of these pages are given at the end
of the text.]




AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN




I

ANCESTRY AND EARLY YOUTH IN
BOSTON


  Twyford,[3] _at the Bishop of St. Asaph's_, 1771.

Dear son: I have ever had pleasure in obtaining any little anecdotes
of my ancestors. You may remember the inquiries I made among the
remains of my relations when you were with me in England, and the
journey I undertook for that purpose. Imagining it may be equally
agreeable to you to know the circumstances of my life, many of which
you are yet unacquainted with, and expecting the enjoyment of a week's
uninterrupted leisure in my present country retirement, I sit down to
write them for you. To which I have besides some other inducements.
Having emerged from the poverty and obscurity in which I was born and
bred, to a state of affluence and some degree of reputation in the
world, and having gone so far through life with a considerable share
of felicity, the conducing means I made use of, which with the
blessing of God so well succeeded, my posterity may like to know, as
they may find some of them suitable to their own situations, and
therefore fit to be imitated.

    [3] A small village not far from Winchester in
    Hampshire, southern England. Here was the country seat
    of the Bishop of St. Asaph, Dr. Jonathan Shipley, the
    "good Bishop," as Dr. Franklin used to style him. Their
    relations were intimate and confidential. In his pulpit,
    and in the House of Lords, as well as in society, the
    bishop always opposed the harsh measures of the Crown
    toward the Colonies.--Bigelow.

That felicity, when I reflected on it, has induced me sometimes to
say, that were it offered to my choice, I should have no objection to
a repetition of the same life from its beginning, only asking the
advantages authors have in a second edition to correct some faults of
the first. So I might, besides correcting the faults, change some
sinister accidents and events of it for others more favourable. But
though this were denied, I should still accept the offer. Since such a
repetition is not to be expected, the next thing most like living
one's life over again seems to be a recollection of that life, and to
make that recollection as durable as possible by putting it down in
writing.

Hereby, too, I shall indulge the inclination so natural in old men, to
be talking of themselves and their own past actions; and I shall
indulge it without being tiresome to others, who, through respect to
age, might conceive themselves obliged to give me a hearing, since
this may be read or not as anyone pleases. And, lastly (I may as well
confess it, since my denial of it will be believed by nobody), perhaps
I shall a good deal gratify my own _vanity_.[4] Indeed, I scarce ever
heard or saw the introductory words, "_Without vanity I may say_,"
etc., but some vain thing immediately followed. Most people dislike
vanity in others, whatever share they have of it themselves; but I
give it fair quarter wherever I meet with it, being persuaded that it
is often productive of good to the possessor, and to others that are
within his sphere of action; and therefore, in many cases, it would
not be altogether absurd if a man were to thank God for his vanity
among the other comforts of life.

    [4] In this connection Woodrow Wilson says, "And yet the
    surprising and delightful thing about this book (the
    _Autobiography_) is that, take it all in all, it has not
    the low tone of conceit, but is a staunch man's sober
    and unaffected assessment of himself and the
    circumstances of his career."

    Gibbon and Hume, the great British historians, who were
    contemporaries of Franklin, express in their
    autobiographies the same feeling about the propriety of
    just self-praise.

And now I speak of thanking God, I desire with all humility to
acknowledge that I owe the mentioned happiness of my past life to His
kind providence, which lead me to the means I used and gave them
success. My belief of this induces me to _hope_, though I must not
_presume_, that the same goodness will still be exercised toward me,
in continuing that happiness, or enabling me to bear a fatal reverse,
which I may experience as others have done; the complexion of my
future fortune being known to Him only in whose power it is to bless
to us even our afflictions.

The notes one of my uncles (who had the same kind of curiosity in
collecting family anecdotes) once put into my hands, furnished me with
several particulars relating to our ancestors. From these notes I
learned that the family had lived in the same village, Ecton, in
Northamptonshire,[5] for three hundred years, and how much longer he
knew not (perhaps from the time when the name of Franklin, that before
was the name of an order of people,[6] was assumed by them as a
surname when others took surnames all over the kingdom), on a freehold
of about thirty acres, aided by the smith's business, which had
continued in the family till his time, the eldest son being always
bred to that business; a custom which he and my father followed as to
their eldest sons. When I searched the registers at Ecton, I found an
account of their births, marriages and burials from the year 1555
only, there being no registers kept in that parish at any time
preceding. By that register I perceived that I was the youngest son of
the youngest son for five generations back. My grandfather Thomas, who
was born in 1598, lived at Ecton till he grew too old to follow
business longer, when he went to live with his son John, a dyer at
Banbury, in Oxfordshire, with whom my father served an apprenticeship.
There my grandfather died and lies buried. We saw his gravestone in
1758. His eldest son Thomas lived in the house at Ecton, and left it
with the land to his only child, a daughter, who, with her husband,
one Fisher, of Wellingborough, sold it to Mr. Isted, now lord of the
manor there. My grandfather had four sons that grew up, viz.: Thomas,
John, Benjamin and Josiah. I will give you what account I can of them
at this distance from my papers, and if these are not lost in my
absence, you will among them find many more particulars.

    [5] See _Introduction_.

    [6] A small landowner.

Thomas was bred a smith under his father; but, being ingenious, and
encouraged in learning (as all my brothers were) by an Esquire Palmer,
then the principal gentleman in that parish, he qualified himself for
the business of scrivener; became a considerable man in the county;
was a chief mover of all public-spirited undertakings for the county
or town of Northampton, and his own village, of which many instances
were related of him; and much taken notice of and patronized by the
then Lord Halifax. He died in 1702, January 6, old style,[7] just four
years to a day before I was born. The account we received of his life
and character from some old people at Ecton, I remember, struck you as
something extraordinary, from its similarity to what you knew of mine.
"Had he died on the same day," you said, "one might have supposed a
transmigration."

    [7] January 17, new style. This change in the calendar
    was made in 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII, and adopted in
    England in 1752. Every year whose number in the common
    reckoning since Christ is not divisible by 4, as well as
    every year whose number is divisible by 100 but not by
    400, shall have 365 days, and all other years shall have
    366 days. In the eighteenth century there was a
    difference of eleven days between the old and the new
    style of reckoning, which the English Parliament
    canceled by making the 3rd of September, 1752, the 14th.
    The Julian calendar, or "old style," is still retained
    in Russia and Greece, whose dates consequently are now
    13 days behind those of other Christian countries.

John was bred a dyer, I believe of woollens, Benjamin was bred a silk
dyer, serving an apprenticeship at London. He was an ingenious man. I
remember him well, for when I was a boy he came over to my father in
Boston, and lived in the house with us some years. He lived to a
great age. His grandson, Samuel Franklin, now lives in Boston. He left
behind him two quarto volumes, MS., of his own poetry, consisting of
little occasional pieces addressed to his friends and relations, of
which the following, sent to me, is a specimen.[8] He had formed a
short-hand of his own, which he taught me, but, never practising it, I
have now forgot it. I was named after this uncle, there being a
particular affection between him and my father. He was very pious, a
great attender of sermons of the best preachers, which he took down in
his short-hand, and had with him many volumes of them. He was also
much of a politician; too much, perhaps, for his station. There fell
lately into my hands, in London, a collection he had made of all the
principal pamphlets relating to public affairs, from 1641 to 1717;
many of the volumes are wanting as appears by the numbering, but
there still remain eight volumes in folio, and twenty-four in quarto
and in octavo. A dealer in old books met with them, and knowing me by
my sometimes buying of him, he brought them to me. It seems my uncle
must have left them here when he went to America, which was about
fifty years since. There are many of his notes in the margins.

    [8] The specimen is not in the manuscript of the
    _Autobiography_.

This obscure family of ours was early in the Reformation, and
continued Protestants through the reign of Queen Mary, when they were
sometimes in danger of trouble on account of their zeal against
popery. They had got an English Bible, and to conceal and secure it,
it was fastened open with tapes under and within the cover of a
joint-stool. When my great-great-grandfather read it to his family, he
turned up the joint-stool upon his knees, turning over the leaves then
under the tapes. One of the children stood at the door to give notice
if he saw the apparitor coming, who was an officer of the spiritual
court. In that case the stool was turned down again upon its feet,
when the Bible remained concealed under it as before. This anecdote I
had from my uncle Benjamin. The family continued all of the Church of
England till about the end of Charles the Second's reign, when some of
the ministers that had been outed for non-conformity, holding
conventicles[9] in Northamptonshire, Benjamin and Josiah adhered to
them, and so continued all their lives: the rest of the family
remained with the Episcopal Church.

    [9] Secret gatherings of dissenters from the established
    Church.

[Illustration: Birthplace of Franklin. Milk Street, Boston.]

Josiah, my father, married young, and carried his wife with three
children into New England, about 1682. The conventicles having been
forbidden by law, and frequently disturbed, induced some considerable
men of his acquaintance to remove to that country, and he was
prevailed with to accompany them thither, where they expected to enjoy
their mode of religion with freedom. By the same wife he had four
children more born there, and by a second wife ten more, in all
seventeen; of which I remember thirteen sitting at one time at his
table, who all grew up to be men and women, and married; I was the
youngest son, and the youngest child but two, and was born in Boston,
New England.[10] My mother, the second wife, was Abiah Folger,
daughter of Peter Folger, one of the first settlers of New England, of
whom honorable mention is made by Cotton Mather,[11] in his church
history of that country, entitled _Magnalia Christi Americana_, as "_a
godly, learned Englishman_," if I remember the words rightly. I have
heard that he wrote sundry small occasional pieces, but only one of
them was printed, which I saw now many years since. It was written in
1675, in the home-spun verse of that time and people, and addressed to
those then concerned in the government there. It was in favour of
liberty of conscience, and in behalf of the Baptists, Quakers, and
other sectaries that had been under persecution, ascribing the Indian
wars, and other distresses that had befallen the country, to that
persecution, as so many judgments of God to punish so heinous an
offense, and exhorting a repeal of those uncharitable laws. The whole
appeared to me as written with a good deal of decent plainness and
manly freedom. The six concluding lines I remember, though I have
forgotten the two first of the stanza; but the purport of them was,
that his censures proceeded from good-will, and, therefore, he would
be known to be the author.

  "Because to be a libeller (says he)
    I hate it with my heart;
  From Sherburne town,[12] where now I dwell
    My name I do put here;
  Without offense your real friend,
    It is Peter Folgier."

    [10] Franklin was born on Sunday, January 6, old style,
    1706, in a house on Milk Street, opposite the Old South
    Meeting House, where he was baptized on the day of his
    birth, during a snowstorm. The house where he was born
    was burned in 1810.--Griffin.

    [11] Cotton Mather (1663-1728), clergyman, author, and
    scholar. Pastor of the North Church, Boston. He took an
    active part in the persecution of witchcraft.

    [12] Nantucket.

My elder brothers were all put apprentices to different trades. I was
put to the grammar-school at eight years of age, my father intending
to devote me, as the tithe[13] of his sons, to the service of the
Church. My early readiness in learning to read (which must have been
very early, as I do not remember when I could not read), and the
opinion of all his friends, that I should certainly make a good
scholar, encouraged him in this purpose of his. My uncle Benjamin,
too, approved of it, and proposed to give me all his short-hand
volumes of sermons, I suppose as a stock to set up with, if I would
learn his character.[14] I continued, however, at the grammar-school
not quite one year, though in that time I had risen gradually from the
middle of the class of that year to be the head of it, and farther was
removed into the next class above it, in order to go with that into
the third at the end of the year. But my father, in the meantime, from
a view of the expense of a college education, which having so large a
family he could not well afford, and the mean living many so educated
were afterwards able to obtain--reasons that he gave to his friends in
my hearing--altered his first intention, took me from the
grammar-school, and sent me to a school for writing and arithmetic,
kept by a then famous man, Mr. George Brownell, very successful in
his profession generally, and that by mild, encouraging methods. Under
him I acquired fair writing pretty soon, but I failed in the
arithmetic, and made no progress in it. At ten years old I was taken
home to assist my father in his business, which was that of a
tallow-chandler and sope-boiler; a business he was not bred to, but
had assumed on his arrival in New England, and on finding his dyeing
trade would not maintain his family, being in little request.
Accordingly, I was employed in cutting wick for the candles, filling
the dipping mould and the moulds for cast candles, attending the shop,
going of errands, etc.

    [13] Tenth.

    [14] System of short-hand.

I disliked the trade, and had a strong inclination for the sea, but my
father declared against it; however, living near the water, I was much
in and about it, learnt early to swim well, and to manage boats; and
when in a boat or canoe with other boys, I was commonly allowed to
govern, especially in any case of difficulty; and upon other occasions
I was generally a leader among the boys, and sometimes led them into
scrapes, of which I will mention one instance, as it shows an early
projecting public spirit, tho' not then justly conducted.

There was a salt-marsh that bounded part of the mill-pond, on the edge
of which, at high water, we used to stand to fish for minnows. By much
trampling, we had made it a mere quagmire. My proposal was to build a
wharf there fit for us to stand upon, and I showed my comrades a large
heap of stones, which were intended for a new house near the marsh,
and which would very well suit our purpose. Accordingly, in the
evening, when the workmen were gone, I assembled a number of my
playfellows, and working with them diligently like so many emmets,
sometimes two or three to a stone, we brought them all away and built
our little wharf. The next morning the workmen were surprised at
missing the stones, which were found in our wharf. Inquiry was made
after the removers; we were discovered and complained of; several of
us were corrected by our fathers; and, though I pleaded the usefulness
of the work, mine convinced me that nothing was useful which was not
honest.

I think you may like to know something of his person and character. He
had an excellent constitution of body, was of middle stature, but well
set, and very strong; he was ingenious, could draw prettily, was
skilled a little in music, and had a clear, pleasing voice, so that
when he played psalm tunes on his violin and sung withal, as he
sometimes did in an evening after the business of the day was over, it
was extremely agreeable to hear. He had a mechanical genius too, and,
on occasion, was very handy in the use of other tradesmen's tools; but
his great excellence lay in a sound understanding and solid judgment
in prudential matters, both in private and publick affairs. In the
latter, indeed, he was never employed, the numerous family he had to
educate and the straitness of his circumstances keeping him close to
his trade; but I remember well his being frequently visited by leading
people, who consulted him for his opinion in affairs of the town or of
the church he belonged to, and showed a good deal of respect for his
judgment and advice: he was also much consulted by private persons
about their affairs when any difficulty occurred, and frequently
chosen an arbitrator between contending parties. At his table he liked
to have, as often as he could, some sensible friend or neighbor to
converse with, and always took care to start some ingenious or useful
topic for discourse, which might tend to improve the minds of his
children. By this means he turned our attention to what was good,
just, and prudent in the conduct of life; and little or no notice was
ever taken of what related to the victuals on the table, whether it
was well or ill dressed, in or out of season, of good or bad flavor,
preferable or inferior to this or that other thing of the kind, so
that I was bro't up in such a perfect inattention to those matters as
to be quite indifferent what kind of food was set before me, and so
unobservant of it, that to this day if I am asked I can scarce tell a
few hours after dinner what I dined upon. This has been a convenience
to me in traveling, where my companions have been sometimes very
unhappy for want of a suitable gratification of their more delicate,
because better instructed, tastes and appetites.

My mother had likewise an excellent constitution: she suckled all her
ten children. I never knew either my father or mother to have any
sickness but that of which they dy'd, he at 89, and she at 85 years of
age. They lie buried together at Boston, where I some years since
placed a marble over their grave,[15] with this inscription:

                     Josiah Franklin,
                           and
                     Abiah his wife,
                   lie here interred.
         They lived lovingly together in wedlock
                    fifty-five years.
       Without an estate, or any gainful employment,
             By constant labor and industry,
                  with God's blessing,
             They maintained a large family
                      comfortably,
            and brought up thirteen children
                 and seven grandchildren
                       reputably.
               From this instance, reader,
        Be encouraged to diligence in thy calling,
               And distrust not Providence.
             He was a pious and prudent man;
           She, a discreet and virtuous woman.
                 Their youngest son,
            In filial regard to their memory,
                  Places this stone.
          J. F. born 1655, died 1744, Ætat 89.
          A. F. born 1667, died 1752,----85.

    [15] This marble having decayed, the citizens of Boston
    in 1827 erected in its place a granite obelisk,
    twenty-one feet high, bearing the original inscription
    quoted in the text and another explaining the erection
    of the monument.

By my rambling digressions I perceive myself to be grown old. I us'd
to write more methodically. But one does not dress for private company
as for a publick ball. 'Tis perhaps only negligence.

To return: I continued thus employed in my father's business for two
years, that is, till I was twelve years old; and my brother John, who
was bred to that business, having left my father, married, and set up
for himself at Rhode Island, there was all appearance that I was
destined to supply his place, and become a tallow-chandler. But my
dislike to the trade continuing, my father was under apprehensions
that if he did not find one for me more agreeable, I should break away
and get to sea, as his son Josiah had done, to his great vexation. He
therefore sometimes took me to walk with him, and see joiners,
bricklayers, turners, braziers, etc., at their work, that he might
observe my inclination, and endeavor to fix it on some trade or other
on land. It has ever since been a pleasure to me to see good workmen
handle their tools; and it has been useful to me, having learnt so
much by it as to be able to do little jobs myself in my house when a
workman could not readily be got, and to construct little machines for
my experiments, while the intention of making the experiment was fresh
and warm in my mind. My father at last fixed upon the cutler's trade,
and my uncle Benjamin's son Samuel, who was bred to that business in
London, being about that time established in Boston, I was sent to be
with him some time on liking. But his expectations of a fee with me
displeasing my father, I was taken home again.




II

BEGINNING LIFE AS A PRINTER


From a child I was fond of reading, and all the little money that came
into my hands was ever laid out in books. Pleased with the _Pilgrim's
Progress_, my first collection was of John Bunyan's works in separate
little volumes. I afterward sold them to enable me to buy R. Burton's
_Historical Collections_; they were small chapmen's books,[16] and
cheap, 40 or 50 in all. My father's little library consisted chiefly
of books in polemic divinity, most of which I read, and have since
often regretted that, at a time when I had such a thirst for
knowledge, more proper books had not fallen in my way, since it was
now resolved I should not be a clergyman. Plutarch's _Lives_ there was
in which I read abundantly, and I still think that time spent to great
advantage. There was also a book of DeFoe's, called an _Essay on
Projects_, and another of Dr. Mather's, called _Essays to do Good_,
which perhaps gave me a turn of thinking that had an influence on
some of the principal future events of my life.

    [16] Small books, sold by chapmen or peddlers.

This bookish inclination at length determined my father to make me a
printer, though he had already one son (James) of that profession. In
1717 my brother James returned from England with a press and letters
to set up his business in Boston. I liked it much better than that of
my father, but still had a hankering for the sea. To prevent the
apprehended effect of such an inclination, my father was impatient to
have me bound to my brother. I stood out some time, but at last was
persuaded, and signed the indentures when I was yet but twelve years
old. I was to serve as an apprentice till I was twenty-one years of
age, only I was to be allowed journeyman's wages during the last year.
In a little time I made great proficiency in the business, and became
a useful hand to my brother. I now had access to better books. An
acquaintance with the apprentices of booksellers enabled me sometimes
to borrow a small one, which I was careful to return soon and clean.
Often I sat up in my room reading the greatest part of the night, when
the book was borrowed in the evening and to be returned early in the
morning, lest it should be missed or wanted.

And after some time an ingenious tradesman, Mr. Matthew Adams, who
had a pretty collection of books, and who frequented our
printing-house, took notice of me, invited me to his library, and
very kindly lent me such books as I chose to read. I now took a fancy
to poetry, and made some little pieces; my brother, thinking it might
turn to account, encouraged me, and put me on composing occasional
ballads. One was called _The Lighthouse Tragedy_, and contained an
account of the drowning of Captain Worthilake, with his two daughters:
the other was a sailor's song, on the taking of _Teach_ (or
Blackbeard) the pirate. They were wretched stuff, in the
Grub-street-ballad style;[17] and when they were printed he sent me
about the town to sell them. The first sold wonderfully, the event
being recent, having made a great noise. This flattered my vanity; but
my father discouraged me by ridiculing my performances, and telling me
verse-makers were generally beggars. So I escaped being a poet, most
probably a very bad one; but as prose writing has been of great use to
me in the course of my life, and was a principal means of my
advancement, I shall tell you how, in such a situation, I acquired
what little ability I have in that way.

    [17] Grub-street: famous in English literature as the
    home of poor writers.

There was another bookish lad in the town, John Collins by name, with
whom I was intimately acquainted. We sometimes disputed, and very fond
we were of argument, and very desirous of confuting one another,
which disputatious turn, by the way, is apt to become a very bad
habit, making people often extremely disagreeable in company by the
contradiction that is necessary to bring it into practice; and thence,
besides souring and spoiling the conversation, is productive of
disgusts and, perhaps enmities where you may have occasion for
friendship. I had caught it by reading my father's books of dispute
about religion. Persons of good sense, I have since observed, seldom
fall into it, except lawyers, university men, and men of all sorts
that have been bred at Edinborough.

A question was once, somehow or other, started between Collins and me,
of the propriety of educating the female sex in learning, and their
abilities for study. He was of opinion that it was improper, and that
they were naturally unequal to it. I took the contrary side, perhaps a
little for dispute's sake. He was naturally more eloquent, had a ready
plenty of words, and sometimes, as I thought, bore me down more by his
fluency than by the strength of his reasons. As we parted without
settling the point, and were not to see one another again for some
time, I sat down to put my arguments in writing, which I copied fair
and sent to him. He answered, and I replied. Three or four letters of
a side had passed, when my father happened to find my papers and read
them. Without entering into the discussion, he took occasion to talk
to me about the manner of my writing; observed that, though I had the
advantage of my antagonist in correct spelling and pointing (which I
ow'd to the printing-house), I fell far short in elegance of
expression, in method and in perspicuity, of which he convinced me by
several instances. I saw the justice of his remarks, and thence grew
more attentive to the manner in writing, and determined to endeavor at
improvement.

About this time I met with an odd volume of the _Spectator_.[18] It was
the third. I had never before seen any of them. I bought it, read it
over and over, and was much delighted with it. I thought the writing
excellent, and wished, if possible, to imitate it. With this view I
took some of the papers, and, making short hints of the sentiment in
each sentence, laid them by a few days, and then, without looking at
the book, try'd to compleat the papers again, by expressing each
hinted sentiment at length, and as fully as it had been expressed
before, in any suitable words that should come to hand. Then I
compared my _Spectator_ with the original, discovered some of my
faults, and corrected them. But I found I wanted a stock of words, or
a readiness in recollecting and using them, which I thought I should
have acquired before that time if I had gone on making verses; since
the continual occasion for words of the same import, but of different
length, to suit the measure, or of different sound for the rhyme,
would have laid me under a constant necessity of searching for
variety, and also have tended to fix that variety in my mind, and make
me master of it. Therefore I took some of the tales and turned them
into verse; and, after a time, when I had pretty well forgotten the
prose, turned them back again. I also sometimes jumbled my collections
of hints into confusion, and after some weeks endeavored to reduce
them into the best order, before I began to form the full sentences
and compleat the paper. This was to teach me method in the arrangement
of thoughts. By comparing my work afterwards with the original, I
discovered many faults and amended them; but I sometimes had the
pleasure of fancying that, in certain particulars of small import, I
had been lucky enough to improve the method of the language, and this
encouraged me to think I might possibly in time come to be a tolerable
English writer, of which I was extremely ambitious. My time for these
exercises and for reading was at night, after work or before it began
in the morning, or on Sundays, when I contrived to be in the
printing-house alone, evading as much as I could the common attendance
on public worship which my father used to exact of me when I was under
his care, and which indeed I still thought a duty, thought I could
not, as it seemed to me, afford time to practise it.

    [18] A daily London journal, comprising satirical essays
    on social subjects, published by Addison and Steele in
    1711-1712. The _Spectator_ and its predecessor, the
    _Tatler_ (1709), marked the beginning of periodical
    literature.

When about 16 years of age I happened to meet with a book, written by
one Tryon, recommending a vegetable diet. I determined to go into it.
My brother, being yet unmarried, did not keep house, but boarded
himself and his apprentices in another family. My refusing to eat
flesh occasioned an inconveniency, and I was frequently chid for my
singularity. I made myself acquainted with Tryon's manner of preparing
some of his dishes, such as boiling potatoes or rice, making hasty
pudding, and a few others, and then proposed to my brother, that if he
would give me, weekly, half the money he paid for my board, I would
board myself. He instantly agreed to it, and I presently found that I
could save half what he paid me. This was an additional fund for
buying books. But I had another advantage in it. My brother and the
rest going from the printing-house to their meals, I remained there
alone, and, dispatching presently my light repast, which often was no
more than a bisket or a slice of bread, a handful of raisins or a tart
from the pastry-cook's, and a glass of water, had the rest of the time
till their return for study, in which I made the greater progress,
from that greater clearness of head and quicker apprehension which
usually attend temperance in eating and drinking.

And now it was that, being on some occasion made asham'd of my
ignorance in figures, which I had twice failed in learning when at
school, I took Cocker's book of Arithmetick, and went through the
whole by myself with great ease. I also read Seller's and Shermy's
books of Navigation, and became acquainted with the little geometry
they contain; but never proceeded far in that science. And I read
about this time Locke _On Human Understanding_,[19] and the _Art of
Thinking_, by Messrs. du Port Royal.[20]

    [19] John Locke (1632-1704), a celebrated English
    philosopher, founder of the so-called "common-sense"
    school of philosophers. He drew up a constitution for
    the colonists of Carolina.

    [20] A noted society of scholarly and devout men
    occupying the abbey of Port Royal near Paris, who
    published learned works, among them the one here
    referred to, better known as the _Port Royal Logic_.

While I was intent on improving my language, I met with an English
grammar (I think it was Greenwood's), at the end of which there were
two little sketches of the arts of rhetoric and logic, the latter
finishing with a specimen of a dispute in the Socratic[21] method; and
soon after I procur'd Xenophon's Memorable Things of Socrates, wherein
there are many instances of the same method. I was charm'd with it,
adopted it, dropt my abrupt contradiction and positive argumentation,
and put on the humble inquirer and doubter. And being then, from
reading Shaftesbury and Collins, become a real doubter in many points
of our religious doctrine, I found this method safest for myself and
very embarrassing to those against whom I used it; therefore I took a
delight in it, practis'd it continually, and grew very artful and
expert in drawing people, even of superior knowledge, into
concessions, the consequences of which they did not foresee,
entangling them in difficulties out of which they could not extricate
themselves, and so obtaining victories that neither myself nor my
cause always deserved. I continu'd this method some few years, but
gradually left it, retaining only the habit of expressing myself in
terms of modest diffidence; never using, when I advanced anything that
may possibly be disputed, the words _certainly_, _undoubtedly_, or any
others that give the air of positiveness to an opinion; but rather
say, I conceive or apprehend a thing to be so and so; it appears to
me, or _I should think it so or so_, for such and such reasons; or _I
imagine it to be so_; or _it is so, if I am not mistaken_. This habit,
I believe, has been of great advantage to me when I have had occasion
to inculcate my opinions, and persuade men into measures that I have
been from time to time engaged in promoting; and, as the chief ends of
conversation are to _inform_ or to be _informed_, to _please_ or to
_persuade_, I wish well-meaning, sensible men would not lessen their
power of doing good by a positive, assuming manner, that seldom fails
to disgust, tends to create opposition, and to defeat everyone of
those purposes for which speech was given to us, to wit, giving or
receiving information or pleasure. For, if you would inform, a
positive and dogmatical manner in advancing your sentiments may
provoke contradiction and prevent a candid attention. If you wish
information and improvement from the knowledge of others, and yet at
the same time express yourself as firmly fix'd in your present
opinions, modest, sensible men, who do not love disputation, will
probably leave you undisturbed in the possession of your error. And by
such a manner, you can seldom hope to recommend yourself in _pleasing_
your hearers, or to persuade those whose concurrence you desire.
Pope[22] says, judiciously:

  _"Men should be taught as if you taught them not,
   And things unknown propos'd as things forgot;"_

farther recommending to us

  "To speak, tho' sure, with seeming diffidence."

And he might have coupled with this line that
which he has coupled with another, I think,
less properly,

  "For want of modesty is want of sense."

If you ask, Why less properly? I must repeat the lines,

  "Immodest words admit of no defense,
   For want of modesty is want of sense."

Now, is not _want of sense_ (where a man is so unfortunate as to want
it) some apology for his _want of modesty_? and would not the lines
stand more justly thus?

  "Immodest words admit _but_ this defense,
   That want of modesty is want of sense."

This, however, I should submit to better judgments.

    [21] Socrates confuted his opponents in argument by
    asking questions so skillfully devised that the answers
    would confirm the questioner's position or show the
    error of the opponent.

    [22] Alexander Pope (1688-1744), the greatest English
    poet of the first half of the eighteenth century.

My brother had, in 1720 or 1721, begun to print a newspaper. It was
the second that appeared in America,[23] and was called the New England
Courant. The only one before it was the Boston News-Letter. I remember
his being dissuaded by some of his friends from the undertaking, as
not likely to succeed, one newspaper being, in their judgment, enough
for America. At this time (1771) there are not less than
five-and-twenty. He went on, however, with the undertaking, and after
having worked in composing the types and printing off the sheets, I
was employed to carry the papers thro' the streets to the customers.

    [23] Franklin's memory does not serve him correctly here.
    The _Courant_ was really the fifth newspaper established
    in America, although generally called the fourth,
    because the first, _Public Occurrences_, published in
    Boston in 1690, was suppressed after the first issue.
    Following is the order in which the other four papers
    were published: _Boston News Letter_, 1704; _Boston
    Gazette_, December 21, 1719; _The American Weekly
    Mercury_, Philadelphia, December 22, 1719; _The New
    England Courant_, 1721.

[Illustration: First page of The New England Courant of Dec. 4-11,
1721. Reduced about one-third. From a copy in the Library of the
Massachusetts Historical Society.]

[Transcriber's note: Transcription given at the end of the text.]

He had some ingenious men among his friends, who amus'd themselves by
writing little pieces for this paper, which gain'd it credit and made
it more in demand, and these gentlemen often visited us. Hearing their
conversations, and their accounts of the approbation their papers were
received with, I was excited to try my hand among them; but, being
still a boy, and suspecting that my brother would object to printing
anything of mine in his paper if he knew it to be mine, I contrived to
disguise my hand, and, writing an anonymous paper, I put it in at
night under the door of the printing-house. It was found in the
morning, and communicated to his writing friends when they call'd in
as usual. They read it, commented on it in my hearing, and I had the
exquisite pleasure of finding it met with their approbation, and that,
in their different guesses at the author, none were named but men of
some character among us for learning and ingenuity. I suppose now that
I was rather lucky in my judges, and that perhaps they were not really
so very good ones as I then esteem'd them.

Encourag'd, however, by this, I wrote and conveyed in the same way to
the press several more papers which were equally approv'd; and I kept
my secret till my small fund of sense for such performances was pretty
well exhausted, and then I discovered[24] it, when I began to be
considered a little more by my brother's acquaintance, and in a manner
that did not quite please him, as he thought, probably with reason,
that it tended to make me too vain. And, perhaps, this might be one
occasion of the differences that we began to have about this time.
Though a brother, he considered himself as my master, and me as his
apprentice, and, accordingly, expected the same services from me as he
would from another, while I thought he demean'd me too much in some he
requir'd of me, who from a brother expected more indulgence. Our
disputes were often brought before our father, and I fancy I was
either generally in the right, or else a better pleader, because the
judgment was generally in my favor. But my brother was passionate,
and had often beaten me, which I took extreamly amiss; and, thinking
my apprenticeship very tedious, I was continually wishing for some
opportunity of shortening it, which at length offered in a manner
unexpected.

    [24] Disclosed.

[Illustration: "I was employed to carry the papers thro' the streets
to the customers"]

One of the pieces in our newspaper on some political point, which I
have now forgotten, gave offense to the Assembly. He was taken up,
censur'd, and imprison'd for a month, by the speaker's warrant, I
suppose, because he would not discover his author. I too was taken up
and examin'd before the council; but, tho' I did not give them any
satisfaction, they contented themselves with admonishing me, and
dismissed me, considering me, perhaps, as an apprentice, who was bound
to keep his master's secrets.

During my brother's confinement, which I resented a good deal,
notwithstanding our private differences, I had the management of the
paper; and I made bold to give our rulers some rubs in it, which my
brother took very kindly, while others began to consider me in an
unfavorable light, as a young genius that had a turn for libeling and
satyr. My brother's discharge was accompany'd with an order of the
House (a very odd one), that "_James Franklin should no longer print
the paper called the New England Courant_."

There was a consultation held in our printing-house among his friends,
what he should do in this case. Some proposed to evade the order by
changing the name of the paper; but my brother, seeing inconveniences
in that, it was finally concluded on as a better way, to let it be
printed for the future under the name of Benjamin Franklin; and to
avoid the censure of the Assembly, that might fall on him as still
printing it by his apprentice, the contrivance was that my old
indenture should be return'd to me, with a full discharge on the back
of it, to be shown on occasion, but to secure to him the benefit of my
service, I was to sign new indentures for the remainder of the term,
which were to be kept private. A very flimsy scheme it was; however,
it was immediately executed, and the paper went on accordingly, under
my name for several months.

At length, a fresh difference arising between my brother and me, I
took upon me to assert my freedom, presuming that he would not venture
to produce the new indentures. It was not fair in me to take this
advantage, and this I therefore reckon one of the first errata of my
life; but the unfairness of it weighed little with me, when under the
impressions of resentment for the blows his passion too often urged
him to bestow upon me, though he was otherwise not an ill-natur'd man:
perhaps I was too saucy and provoking.

When he found I would leave him, he took care to prevent my getting
employment in any other printing-house of the town, by going round and
speaking to every master, who accordingly refus'd to give me work. I
then thought of going to New York, as the nearest place where there
was a printer; and I was rather inclin'd to leave Boston when I
reflected that I had already made myself a little obnoxious to the
governing party, and, from the arbitrary proceedings of the Assembly
in my brother's case, it was likely I might, if I stay'd, soon bring
myself into scrapes; and farther, that my indiscreet disputations
about religion began to make me pointed at with horror by good people
as an infidel or atheist. I determin'd on the point, but my father now
siding with my brother, I was sensible that, if I attempted to go
openly, means would be used to prevent me. My friend Collins,
therefore, undertook to manage a little for me. He agreed with the
captain of a New York sloop for my passage, under the notion of my
being a young acquaintance of his. So I sold some of my books to raise
a little money, was taken on board privately, and as we had a fair
wind, in three days I found myself in New York, near 300 miles from
home, a boy of but 17, without the least recommendation to, or
knowledge of, any person in the place, and with very little money in
my pocket.

[Illustration: Sailboat]




III

ARRIVAL IN PHILADELPHIA


My inclinations for the sea were by this time worne out, or I might
now have gratify'd them. But, having a trade, and supposing myself a
pretty good workman, I offer'd my service to the printer in the place,
old Mr. William Bradford, who had been the first printer in
Pennsylvania, but removed from thence upon the quarrel of George
Keith. He could give me no employment, having little to do, and help
enough already; but says he, "My son at Philadelphia has lately lost
his principal hand, Aquilla Rose, by death; if you go thither, I
believe he may employ you." Philadelphia was a hundred miles further;
I set out, however, in a boat for Amboy, leaving my chest and things
to follow me round by sea.

In crossing the bay, we met with a squall that tore our rotten sails
to pieces, prevented our getting into the Kill,[25] and drove us upon
Long Island. In our way, a drunken Dutchman, who was a passenger too,
fell overboard; when he was sinking, I reached through the water to
his shock pate, and drew him up, so that we got him in again. His
ducking sobered him a little, and he went to sleep, taking first out
of his pocket a book, which he desir'd I would dry for him. It proved
to be my old favorite author, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, in Dutch,
finely printed on good paper, with copper cuts, a dress better than I
had ever seen it wear in its own language. I have since found that it
has been translated into most of the languages of Europe, and suppose
it has been more generally read than any other book, except perhaps
the Bible. Honest John was the first that I know of who mix'd
narration and dialogue; a method of writing very engaging to the
reader, who in the most interesting parts finds himself, as it were,
brought into the company and present at the discourse. De Foe in his
Cruso, his Moll Flanders, Religious Courtship, Family Instructor, and
other pieces, has imitated it with success; and Richardson[26] has done
the same in his Pamela, etc.

    [25] Kill van Kull, the channel separating Staten Island
    from New Jersey on the north.

    [26] Samuel Richardson, the father of the English novel,
    wrote _Pamela_, _Clarissa Harlowe_, and the _History of
    Sir Charles Grandison_, novels published in the form of
    letters.

When we drew near the island, we found it was at a place where there
could be no landing, there being a great surff on the stony beach. So
we dropt anchor, and swung round towards the shore. Some people came
down to the water edge and hallow'd to us, as we did to them; but the
wind was so high, and the surff so loud, that we could not hear so as
to understand each other. There were canoes on the shore, and we made
signs, and hallow'd that they should fetch us; but they either did not
understand us, or thought it impracticable, so they went away, and
night coming on, we had no remedy but to wait till the wind should
abate; and, in the meantime, the boatman and I concluded to sleep, if
we could; and so crowded into the scuttle, with the Dutchman, who was
still wet, and the spray beating over the head of our boat, leak'd
thro' to us, so that we were soon almost as wet as he. In this manner
we lay all night, with very little rest; but, the wind abating the
next day, we made a shift to reach Amboy before night, having been
thirty hours on the water, without victuals, or any drink but a bottle
of filthy rum, and the water we sail'd on being salt.

In the evening I found myself very feverish, and went in to bed; but,
having read somewhere that cold water drank plentifully was good for a
fever, I follow'd the prescription, sweat plentifully most of the
night, my fever left me, and in the morning, crossing the ferry, I
proceeded on my journey on foot, having fifty miles to Burlington,
where I was told I should find boats that would carry me the rest of
the way to Philadelphia.

[Illustration: It rained very hard all the day]

It rained very hard all the day; I was thoroughly soak'd, and by noon
a good deal tired; so I stopt at a poor inn, where I staid all night,
beginning now to wish that I had never left home. I cut so miserable a
figure, too, that I found, by the questions ask'd me, I was suspected
to be some runaway servant, and in danger of being taken up on that
suspicion. However, I proceeded the next day, and got in the evening
to an inn, within eight or ten miles of Burlington, kept by one Dr.
Brown. He entered into conversation with me while I took some
refreshment, and, finding I had read a little, became very sociable
and friendly. Our acquaintance continu'd as long as he liv'd. He had
been, I imagine, an itinerant doctor, for there was no town in
England, or country in Europe, of which he could not give a very
particular account. He had some letters, and was ingenious, but much
of an unbeliever, and wickedly undertook, some years after, to
travesty the Bible in doggrel verse, as Cotton had done Virgil. By
this means he set many of the facts in a very ridiculous light, and
might have hurt weak minds if his work had been published; but it
never was.

At his house I lay that night, and the next morning reach'd
Burlington, but had the mortification to find that the regular boats
were gone a little before my coming, and no other expected to go
before Tuesday, this being Saturday; wherefore I returned to an old
woman in the town, of whom I had bought gingerbread to eat on the
water, and ask'd her advice. She invited me to lodge at her house till
a passage by water should offer; and being tired with my foot
traveling, I accepted the invitation. She understanding I was a
printer, would have had me stay at that town and follow my business,
being ignorant of the stock necessary to begin with. She was very
hospitable, gave me a dinner of ox-cheek with great good will,
accepting only of a pot of ale in return; and I thought myself fixed
till Tuesday should come. However, walking in the evening by the side
of the river, a boat came by, which I found was going towards
Philadelphia, with several people in her. They took me in, and, as
there was no wind, we row'd all the way; and about midnight, not
having yet seen the city, some of the company were confident we must
have passed it, and would row no farther; the others knew not where we
were; so we put toward the shore, got into a creek, landed near an old
fence, with the rails of which we made a fire, the night being cold,
in October, and there we remained till daylight. Then one of the
company knew the place to be Cooper's Creek, a little above
Philadelphia, which we saw as soon as we got out of the creek, and
arriv'd there about eight or nine o'clock on the Sunday morning, and
landed at the Market-street wharf.

I have been the more particular in this description of my journey, and
shall be so of my first entry into that city, that you may in your
mind compare such unlikely beginnings with the figure I have since
made there. I was in my working dress, my best clothes being to come
round by sea. I was dirty from my journey; my pockets were stuff'd out
with shirts and stockings, and I knew no soul nor where to look for
lodging. I was fatigued with traveling, rowing, and want of rest, I
was very hungry; and my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch
dollar, and about a shilling in copper. The latter I gave the people
of the boat for my passage, who at first refus'd it, on account of my
rowing; but I insisted on their taking it. A man being sometimes more
generous when he has but a little money than when he has plenty,
perhaps thro' fear of being thought to have but little.

Then I walked up the street, gazing about till near the market-house I
met a boy with bread. I had made many a meal on bread, and, inquiring
where he got it, I went immediately to the baker's he directed me to,
in Second-street, and ask'd for bisket, intending such as we had in
Boston; but they, it seems, were not made in Philadelphia. Then I
asked for a three-penny loaf, and was told they had none such. So not
considering or knowing the difference of money, and the great

Data science is an interdisciplinary academic field [1] that uses statistics, scientific computing, scientific methods, processes, algorithms and systems to extract or extrapolate knowledge and insights from noisy, structured, and unstructured data.[2]

Data science also integrates domain knowledge from the underlying application domain (e.g., natural sciences, information technology, and medicine).[3] Data science is multifaceted and can be described as a science, a research paradigm, a research method, a discipline, a workflow, and a profession.[4]

Data science is a "concept to unify statistics, data analysis, informatics, and their related methods" to "understand and analyze actual phenomena" with data.[5] It uses techniques and theories drawn from many fields within the context of mathematics, statistics, computer science, information science, and domain knowledge.[6] However, data science is different from computer science and information science. Turing Award winner Jim Gray imagined data science as a "fourth paradigm" of science (empirical, theoretical, computational, and now data-driven) and asserted that "everything about science is changing because of the impact of information technology" and the data deluge.[7][8]

A data scientist is a professional who creates programming code and combines it with statistical knowledge to create insights from data.[9]

Foundations
Data science is an interdisciplinary field[10] focused on extracting knowledge from typically large data sets and applying the knowledge and insights from that data to solve problems in a wide range of application domains. The field encompasses preparing data for analysis, formulating data science problems, analyzing data, developing data-driven solutions, and presenting findings to inform high-level decisions in a broad range of application domains. As such, it incorporates skills from computer science, statistics, information science, mathematics, data visualization, information visualization, data sonification, data integration, graphic design, complex systems, communication and business.[11][12] Statistician Nathan Yau, drawing on Ben Fry, also links data science to human–computer interaction: users should be able to intuitively control and explore data.[13][14] In 2015, the American Statistical Association identified database management, statistics and machine learning, and distributed and parallel systems as the three emerging foundational professional communities.[15]

Relationship to statistics
Many statisticians, including Nate Silver, have argued that data science is not a new field, but rather another name for statistics.[16] Others argue that data science is distinct from statistics because it focuses on problems and techniques unique to digital data.[17] Vasant Dhar writes that statistics emphasizes quantitative data and description. In contrast, data science deals with quantitative and qualitative data (e.g., from images, text, sensors, transactions, customer information, etc.) and emphasizes prediction and action.[18] Andrew Gelman of Columbia University has described statistics as a non-essential part of data science.[19]

Stanford professor David Donoho writes that data science is not distinguished from statistics by the size of datasets or use of computing and that many graduate programs misleadingly advertise their analytics and statistics training as the essence of a data-science program. He describes data science as an applied field growing out of traditional statistics.[20]

Etymology
Early usage
In 1962, John Tukey described a field he called "data analysis", which resembles modern data science.[20] In 1985, in a lecture given to the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, C. F. Jeff Wu used the term "data science" for the first time as an alternative name for statistics.[21] Later, attendees at a 1992 statistics symposium at the University of Montpellier  II acknowledged the emergence of a new discipline focused on data of various origins and forms, combining established concepts and principles of statistics and data analysis with computing.[22][23]

The term "data science" has been traced back to 1974, when Peter Naur proposed it as an alternative name to computer science.[6] In 1996, the International Federation of Classification Societies became the first conference to specifically feature data science as a topic.[6] However, the definition was still in flux. After the 1985 lecture at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, in 1997 C. F. Jeff Wu again suggested that statistics should be renamed data science. He reasoned that a new name would help statistics shed inaccurate stereotypes, such as being synonymous with accounting or limited to describing data.[24] In 1998, Hayashi Chikio argued for data science as a new, interdisciplinary concept, with three aspects: data design, collection, and analysis.[23]

During the 1990s, popular terms for the process of finding patterns in datasets (which were increasingly large) included "knowledge discovery" and "data mining".[6][25]

Modern usage
In 2012, technologists Thomas H. Davenport and DJ Patil declared "Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century",[26] a catchphrase that was picked up even by major-city newspapers like the New York Times[27] and the Boston Globe.[28] A decade later, they reaffirmed it, stating that "the job is more in demand than ever with employers".[29]

The modern conception of data science as an independent discipline is sometimes attributed to William S. Cleveland.[30] In a 2001 paper, he advocated an expansion of statistics beyond theory into technical areas; because this would significantly change the field, it warranted a new name.[25] "Data science" became more widely used in the next few years: in 2002, the Committee on Data for Science and Technology launched the Data Science Journal. In 2003, Columbia University launched The Journal of Data Science.[25] In 2014, the American Statistical Association's Section on Statistical Learning and Data Mining changed its name to the Section on Statistical Learning and Data Science, reflecting the ascendant popularity of data science.[31]

The professional title of "data scientist" has been attributed to DJ Patil and Jeff Hammerbacher in 2008.[32] Though it was used by the National Science Board in their 2005 report "Long-Lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st Century", it referred broadly to any key role in managing a digital data collection.[33]

There is still no consensus on the definition of data science, and it is considered by some to be a buzzword.[34] Big data is a related marketing term.[35] Data scientists are responsible for breaking down big data into usable information and creating software and algorithms that help companies and organizations determine optimal operations.[36]

Data Science and Data Analysis
Data science and data analysis are both important disciplines in the field of data management and analysis, but they differ in several key ways. While both fields involve working with data, data science is more of an interdisciplinary field that involves the application of statistical, computational, and machine learning methods to extract insights from data and make predictions, while data analysis is more focused on the examination and interpretation of data to identify patterns and trends.[37][38]

Data analysis typically involves working with smaller, structured datasets to answer specific questions or solve specific problems. This can involve tasks such as data cleaning, data visualization, and exploratory data analysis to gain insights into the data and develop hypotheses about relationships between variables. Data analysts typically use statistical methods to test these hypotheses and draw conclusions from the data. For example, a data analyst might analyze sales data to identify trends in customer behavior and make recommendations for marketing strategies.[37]

Data science, on the other hand, is a more complex and iterative process that involves working with larger, more complex datasets that often require advanced computational and statistical methods to analyze. Data scientists often work with unstructured data such as text or images and use machine learning algorithms to build predictive models and make data-driven decisions. In addition to statistical analysis, data science often involves tasks such as data preprocessing, feature engineering, and model selection. For instance, a data scientist might develop a recommendation system for an e-commerce platform by analyzing user behavior patterns and using machine learning algorithms to predict user preferences.[38][39]

While data analysis focuses on extracting insights from existing data, data science goes beyond that by incorporating the development and implementation of predictive models to make informed decisions. Data scientists are often responsible for collecting and cleaning data, selecting appropriate analytical techniques, and deploying models in real-world scenarios. They work at the intersection of mathematics, computer science, and domain expertise to solve complex problems and uncover hidden patterns in large datasets.[38]

Despite these differences, data science and data analysis are closely related fields and often require similar skill sets. Both fields require a solid foundation in statistics, programming, and data visualization, as well as the ability to communicate findings effectively to both technical and non-technical audiences. Moreover, both fields benefit from critical thinking and domain knowledge, as understanding the context and nuances of the data is essential for accurate analysis and modeling.[37][38]

In summary, data analysis and data science are distinct yet interconnected disciplines within the broader field of data management and analysis. Data analysis focuses on extracting insights and drawing conclusions from structured data, while data science involves a more comprehensive approach that combines statistical analysis, computational methods, and machine learning to extract insights, build predictive models, and drive data-driven decision-making. Both fields play vital roles in leveraging the power of data to understand patterns, make informed decisions, and solve complex problems across various domains.


The universe is all of space and time[a] and their contents,[10] including planets, stars, galaxies, and all other forms of matter and energy. The Big Bang theory is the prevailing cosmological description of the development of the universe. According to this theory, space and time emerged together 13.787±0.020 billion years ago,[11] and the universe has been expanding ever since the Big Bang. While the spatial size of the entire universe is unknown,[3] it is possible to measure the size of the observable universe, which is approximately 93 billion light-years in diameter at the present day.

Some of the earliest cosmological models of the universe were developed by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers and were geocentric, placing Earth at the center.[12][13] Over the centuries, more precise astronomical observations led Nicolaus Copernicus to develop the heliocentric model with the Sun at the center of the Solar System. In developing the law of universal gravitation, Isaac Newton built upon Copernicus's work as well as Johannes Kepler's laws of planetary motion and observations by Tycho Brahe.

Further observational improvements led to the realization that the Sun is one of a few hundred billion stars in the Milky Way, which is one of a few hundred billion galaxies in the observable universe. Many of the stars in a galaxy have planets. At the largest scale, galaxies are distributed uniformly and the same in all directions, meaning that the universe has neither an edge nor a center. At smaller scales, galaxies are distributed in clusters and superclusters which form immense filaments and voids in space, creating a vast foam-like structure.[14] Discoveries in the early 20th century have suggested that the universe had a beginning and has been expanding since then.[15]

According to the Big Bang theory, the energy and matter initially present have become less dense as the universe expanded. After an initial accelerated expansion called the inflationary epoch at around 10−32 seconds, and the separation of the four known fundamental forces, the universe gradually cooled and continued to expand, allowing the first subatomic particles and simple atoms to form. Dark matter gradually gathered, forming a foam-like structure of filaments and voids under the influence of gravity. Giant clouds of hydrogen and helium were gradually drawn to the places where dark matter was most dense, forming the first galaxies, stars, and everything else seen today.

From studying the movement of galaxies, it has been discovered that the universe contains much more matter than is accounted for by visible objects; stars, galaxies, nebulas and interstellar gas. This unseen matter is known as dark matter[16] (dark means that there is a wide range of strong indirect evidence that it exists, but we have not yet detected it directly). The ΛCDM model is the most widely accepted model of the universe. It suggests that about 69.2%±1.2% of the mass and energy in the universe is dark energy which is responsible for the acceleration of the expansion of the universe, and about 25.8%±1.1% is dark matter.[17] Ordinary ('baryonic') matter is therefore only 4.84%±0.1% of the physical universe.[17] Stars, planets, and visible gas clouds only form about 6% of the ordinary matter.[18]

There are many competing hypotheses about the ultimate fate of the universe and about what, if anything, preceded the Big Bang, while other physicists and philosophers refuse to speculate, doubting that information about prior states will ever be accessible. Some physicists have suggested various multiverse hypotheses, in which our universe might be one among many universes that likewise exist.[3][19][20]

Part of a series on
Physical cosmology
Big Bang · Universe
Age of the universe
Chronology of the universe
Early universe
Expansion · Future
Components · Structure
Experiments
Scientists
Subject history
 Category
 Astronomy portal
vte
Definition
0:50
Hubble Space Telescope – Ultra deep field galaxies to Legacy field zoom out
(video 00:50; May 2, 2019)
The physical universe is defined as all of space and time[a] (collectively referred to as spacetime) and their contents.[10] Such contents comprise all of energy in its various forms, including electromagnetic radiation and matter, and therefore planets, moons, stars, galaxies, and the contents of intergalactic space.[21][22][23] The universe also includes the physical laws that influence energy and matter, such as conservation laws, classical mechanics, and relativity.[24]

The universe is often defined as "the totality of existence", or everything that exists, everything that has existed, and everything that will exist.[24] In fact, some philosophers and scientists support the inclusion of ideas and abstract concepts—such as mathematics and logic—in the definition of the universe.[26][27][28] The word universe may also refer to concepts such as the cosmos, the world, and nature.[29][30]

Etymology
The word universe derives from the Old French word univers, which in turn derives from the Latin word universus, meaning 'combined into one'.[31] The Latin word 'universum' was used by Cicero and later Latin authors in many of the same senses as the modern English word is used.[32]

Synonyms
A term for universe among the ancient Greek philosophers from Pythagoras onwards was τὸ πᾶν (tò pân) 'the all', defined as all matter and all space, and τὸ ὅλον (tò hólon) 'all things', which did not necessarily include the void.[33][34] Another synonym was ὁ κόσμος (ho kósmos) meaning 'the world, the cosmos'.[35] Synonyms are also found in Latin authors (totum, mundus, natura)[36] and survive in modern languages, e.g., the German words Das All, Weltall, and Natur for universe. The same synonyms are found in English, such as everything (as in the theory of everything), the cosmos (as in cosmology), the world (as in the many-worlds interpretation), and nature (as in natural laws or natural philosophy).[37]

Chronology and the Big Bang
Main articles: Big Bang and Chronology of the universe
Nature timeline
This box: viewtalkedit
−13 —–−12 —–−11 —–−10 —–−9 —–−8 —–−7 —–−6 —–−5 —–−4 —–−3 —–−2 —–−1 —–0 —
Dark Ages
Reionization
Matter-dominated
era
Accelerated expansion
Water on Earth
Single-celled life
Photosynthesis
Multicellular
life
Vertebrates
←	
Earliest Universe
←	
Earliest stars
←	
Earliest galaxy
←	
Earliest quasar / black hole
←	
Omega Centauri
←	
Andromeda Galaxy
←	
Milky Way spirals
←	
NGC 188 star cluster
←	
Alpha Centauri
←	
Earth / Solar System
←	
Earliest known life
←	
Earliest oxygen
←	
Atmospheric oxygen
←	
Sexual reproduction
←	
Earliest fungi
←	
Earliest animals / plants
←	
Cambrian explosion
←	
Earliest mammals
←	
Earliest apes / humans
L
i
f
e
(billion years ago)
The prevailing model for the evolution of the universe is the Big Bang theory.[38][39] The Big Bang model states that the earliest state of the universe was an extremely hot and dense one, and that the universe subsequently expanded and cooled. The model is based on general relativity and on simplifying assumptions such as the homogeneity and isotropy of space. A version of the model with a cosmological constant (Lambda) and cold dark matter, known as the Lambda-CDM model, is the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the universe. The Big Bang model accounts for observations such as the correlation of distance and redshift of galaxies, the ratio of the number of hydrogen to helium atoms, and the microwave radiation background.


In this schematic diagram, time passes from left to right, with the universe represented by a disk-shaped "slice" at any given time. Time and size are not to scale. To make the early stages visible, the time to the afterglow stage (really the first 0.003%) is stretched and the subsequent expansion (really by 1,100 times to the present) is largely suppressed.
The initial hot, dense state is called the Planck epoch, a brief period extending from time zero to one Planck time unit of approximately 10−43 seconds. During the Planck epoch, all types of matter and all types of energy were concentrated into a dense state, and gravity—currently the weakest by far of the four known forces—is believed to have been as strong as the other fundamental forces, and all the forces may have been unified. The physics controlling this very early period (including quantum gravity in the Planck epoch) is not understood, so we cannot say what, if anything, happened before time zero. Since the Planck epoch, the universe has been expanding to its present scale, with a very short but intense period of cosmic inflation speculated to have occurred within the first 10−32 seconds.[40] This initial period of inflation would explain why space appears to be very flat, and is uniform on scales much larger than light could otherwise travel since the start of the universe.

Within the first fraction of a second of the universe's existence, the four fundamental forces had separated. As the universe continued to cool down from its inconceivably hot state, various types of subatomic particles were able to form in short periods of time known as the quark epoch, the hadron epoch, and the lepton epoch. Together, these epochs encompassed less than 10 seconds of time following the Big Bang. These elementary particles associated stably into ever larger combinations, including stable protons and neutrons, which then formed more complex atomic nuclei through nuclear fusion. This process, known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, only lasted for about 17 minutes and ended about 20 minutes after the Big Bang, so only the fastest and simplest reactions occurred. About 25% of the protons and all the neutrons in the universe, by mass, were converted to helium, with small amounts of deuterium (a form of hydrogen) and traces of lithium. Any other element was only formed in very tiny quantities. The other 75% of the protons remained unaffected, as hydrogen nuclei.[41][42]: 27–42 

After nucleosynthesis ended, the universe entered a period known as the photon epoch. During this period, the universe was still far too hot for matter to form neutral atoms, so it contained a hot, dense, foggy plasma of negatively charged electrons, neutral neutrinos and positive nuclei. After about 377,000 years, the universe had cooled enough that electrons and nuclei could form the first stable atoms. This is known as recombination for historical reasons; in fact electrons and nuclei were combining for the first time. Unlike plasma, neutral atoms are transparent to many wavelengths of light, so for the first time the universe also became transparent. The photons released ("decoupled") when these atoms formed can still be seen today; they form the cosmic microwave background (CMB).[42]: 15–27 

As the universe expands, the energy density of electromagnetic radiation decreases more quickly than does that of matter because the energy of each photon decreases as it is cosmologically redshifted. At around 47,000 years, the energy density of matter became larger than that of photons and neutrinos, and began to dominate the large scale behavior of the universe. This marked the end of the radiation-dominated era and the start of the matter-dominated era.[43]: 390 

In the earliest stages of the universe, tiny fluctuations within the universe's density led to concentrations of dark matter gradually forming. Ordinary matter, attracted to these by gravity, formed large gas clouds and eventually, stars and galaxies, where the dark matter was most dense, and voids where it was least dense. After around 100–300 million years,[43]: 333  the first stars formed, known as Population III stars. These were probably very massive, luminous, non metallic and short-lived. They were responsible for the gradual reionization of the universe between about 200–500 million years and 1 billion years, and also for seeding the universe with elements heavier than helium, through stellar nucleosynthesis.[44] The universe also contains a mysterious energy—possibly a scalar field—called dark energy, the density of which does not change over time. After about 9.8 billion years, the universe had expanded sufficiently so that the density of matter was less than the density of dark energy, marking the beginning of the present dark-energy-dominated era.[45] In this era, the expansion of the universe is accelerating due to dark energy.

Physical properties
Main articles: Observable universe, Age of the Universe, and Metric expansion of space
Of the four fundamental interactions, gravitation is the dominant at astronomical length scales. Gravity's effects are cumulative; by contrast, the effects of positive and negative charges tend to cancel one another, making electromagnetism relatively insignificant on astronomical length scales. The remaining two interactions, the weak and strong nuclear forces, decline very rapidly with distance; their effects are confined mainly to sub-atomic length scales.[46]: 1470 

The universe appears to have much more matter than antimatter, an asymmetry possibly related to the CP violation.[47] This imbalance between matter and antimatter is partially responsible for the existence of all matter existing today, since matter and antimatter, if equally produced at the Big Bang, would have completely annihilated each other and left only photons as a result of their interaction.[48] The universe also appears to have neither net momentum nor angular momentum, which follows accepted physical laws if the universe is finite. These laws are Gauss's law and the non-divergence of the stress–energy–momentum pseudotensor.[49]

Size and regions
See also: Observational cosmology

Television signals broadcast from Earth will never reach the edges of this image.
According to the general theory of relativity, far regions of space may never interact with ours even in the lifetime of the universe due to the finite speed of light and the ongoing expansion of space. For example, radio messages sent from Earth may never reach some regions of space, even if the universe were to exist forever: space may expand faster than light can traverse it.[50]

The spatial region that can be observed with telescopes is called the observable universe, which depends on the location of the observer. The proper distance—the distance as would be measured at a specific time, including the present—between Earth and the edge of the observable universe is 46 billion light-years[51] (14 billion parsecs), making the diameter of the observable universe about 93 billion light-years (28 billion parsecs).[51] The distance the light from the edge of the observable universe has travelled is very close to the age of the universe times the speed of light, 13.8 billion light-years (4.2×109 pc), but this does not represent the distance at any given time because the edge of the observable universe and the Earth have since moved further apart.[52] For comparison, the diameter of a typical galaxy is 30,000 light-years (9,198 parsecs), and the typical distance between two neighboring galaxies is 3 million light-years (919.8 kiloparsecs).[53] As an example, the Milky Way is roughly 100,000–180,000 light-years in diameter,[54][55] and the nearest sister galaxy to the Milky Way, the Andromeda Galaxy, is located roughly 2.5 million light-years away.[56]

Because humans cannot observe space beyond the edge of the observable universe, it is unknown whether the size of the universe in its totality is finite or infinite.[3][57][58] Estimates suggest that the whole universe, if finite, must be more than 250 times larger than a Hubble sphere.[59] Some disputed[60] estimates for the total size of the universe, if finite, reach as high as 
10
10
10
122
10^{10^{10^{122}}} megaparsecs, as implied by a suggested resolution of the No-Boundary Proposal.[61][b]

Age and expansion
Main articles: Age of the universe and Expansion of the universe
Assuming that the Lambda-CDM model is correct, the measurements of the parameters using a variety of techniques by numerous experiments yield a best value of the age of the universe at 13.799 ± 0.021 billion years, as of 2015.[2]


Astronomers have discovered stars in the Milky Way galaxy that are almost 13.6 billion years old.
Over time, the universe and its contents have evolved. For example, the relative population of quasars and galaxies has changed[62] and the universe has expanded. This expansion is inferred from the observation that the light from distant galaxies has been redshifted, which implies that the galaxies are receding from us. Analyses of Type Ia supernovae indicate that the expansion is accelerating.[63][64]

The more matter there is in the universe, the stronger the mutual gravitational pull of the matter. If the universe were too dense then it would re-collapse into a gravitational singularity. However, if the universe contained too little matter then the self-gravity would be too weak for astronomical structures, like galaxies or planets, to form. Since the Big Bang, the universe has expanded monotonically. Perhaps unsurprisingly, our universe has just the right mass–energy density, equivalent to about 5 protons per cubic metre, which has allowed it to expand for the last 13.8 billion years, giving time to form the universe as observed today.[65][66]

There are dynamical forces acting on the particles in the universe which affect the expansion rate. Before 1998, it was expected that the expansion rate would be decreasing as time went on due to the influence of gravitational interactions in the universe; and thus there is an additional observable quantity in the universe called the deceleration parameter, which most cosmologists expected to be positive and related to the matter density of the universe. In 1998, the deceleration parameter was measured by two different groups to be negative, approximately −0.55, which technically implies that the second derivative of the cosmic scale factor 
a
¨
{\displaystyle {\ddot {a}}} has been positive in the last 5–6 billion years.[67][68]

Spacetime
Main articles: Spacetime and World line
See also: Lorentz transformation
Modern physics regards events as being organized into spacetime.[69] This idea originated with the special theory of relativity, which predicts that if one observer sees two events happening in different places at the same time, a second observer who is moving relative to the first will see those events happening at different times.[70]: 45–52  The two observers will disagree on the time The square root of the absolute value of this quantity is called the interval between the two events. The interval expresses how widely separated events are, not just in space or in time, but in the combined setting of spacetime.[70]: 84, 136 [71]

The special theory of relativity cannot account for gravity. Its successor, the general theory of relativity, explains gravity by recognizing that spacetime is not fixed but instead dynamical. In general relativity, gravitational force is reimagined as curvature of spacetime. A curved path like an orbit is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straight-line path, but rather the body's attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses. A remark by John Archibald Wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory: "Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve",[72][73] and therefore there is no point in considering one without the other[15] (the Newtonian theory of gravity is a good approximation to the predictions of general relativity when gravitational effects are weak and objects are moving slowly compared to the speed of light[74]: 327 [75]). The relation between matter distribution and spacetime curvature is given by the Einstein field equations, which require tensor calculus to express.[76]: 43 [77] The solutions to these equations include not only the spacetime of special relativity, Minkowski spacetime, but also Schwarzschild spacetimes, which describe black holes; FLRW spacetime, which describes an expanding universe; and more.

The universe appears to be a smooth spacetime continuum consisting of three spatial dimensions and one temporal (time) dimension. Therefore, an event in the spacetime of the physical universe can therefore be identified by a set of four coordinates: (x, y, z, t). On average, space is observed to be very nearly flat (with a curvature close to zero), meaning that Euclidean geometry is empirically true with high accuracy throughout most of the Universe.[78] Spacetime also appears to have a simply connected topology, in analogy with a sphere, at least on the length scale of the observable universe. However, present observations cannot exclude the possibilities that the universe has more dimensions (which is postulated by theories such as the string theory) and that its spacetime may have a multiply connected global topology, in analogy with the cylindrical or toroidal topologies of two-dimensional spaces.[79][80]

Shape
Main article: Shape of the universe

The three possible options for the shape of the universe
General relativity describes how spacetime is curved and bent by mass and energy (gravity). The topology or geometry of the universe includes both local geometry in the observable universe and global geometry. Cosmologists often work with a given space-like slice of spacetime called the comoving coordinates. The section of spacetime which can be observed is the backward light cone, which delimits the cosmological horizon. The cosmological horizon (also called the particle horizon or the light horizon) is the maximum distance from which particles can have traveled to the observer in the age of the universe. This horizon represents the boundary between the observable and the unobservable regions of the universe.[81][82] The existence, properties, and significance of a cosmological horizon depend on the particular cosmological model.

An important parameter determining the future evolution of the universe theory is the density parameter, Omega (Ω), defined as the average matter density of the universe divided by a critical value of that density. This selects one of three possible geometries depending on whether Ω is equal to, less than, or greater than 1. These are called, respectively, the flat, open and closed universes.[83]

Observations, including the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), and Planck maps of the CMB, suggest that the universe is infinite in extent with a finite age, as described by the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) models.[84][79][85][86] These FLRW models thus support inflationary models and the standard model of cosmology, describing a flat, homogeneous universe presently dominated by dark matter and dark energy.[87][88]

Support of life
Main article: Fine-tuned universe
The fine-tuned universe hypothesis is the proposition that the conditions that allow the existence of observable life in the universe can only occur when certain universal fundamental physical constants lie within a very narrow range of values. According to this hypothesis, if any of several fundamental constants were only slightly different, the universe would have been unlikely to be conducive to the establishment and development of matter, astronomical structures, elemental diversity, or life as it is understood. Whether this is true, and whether that question is even logically meaningful to ask, are subjects of much debate.[89] The proposition is discussed among philosophers, scientists, theologians, and proponents of creationism.[90]

Composition
See also: Galaxy formation and evolution, Galaxy cluster, and Nebula
The universe is composed almost completely of dark energy, dark matter, and ordinary matter. Other contents are electromagnetic radiation (estimated to constitute from 0.005% to close to 0.01% of the total mass–energy of the universe) and antimatter.[91][92][93]

The proportions of all types of matter and energy have changed over the history of the universe.[94] The total amount of electromagnetic radiation generated within the universe has decreased by 1/2 in the past 2 billion years.[95][96] Today, ordinary matter, which includes atoms, stars, galaxies, and life, accounts for only 4.9% of the contents of the Universe.[8] The present overall density of this type of matter is very low, roughly 4.5 × 10−31 grams per cubic centimetre, corresponding to a density of the order of only one proton for every four cubic metres of volume.[6] The nature of both dark energy and dark matter is unknown. Dark matter, a mysterious form of matter that has not yet been identified, accounts for 26.8% of the cosmic contents. Dark energy, which is the energy of empty space and is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate, accounts for the remaining 68.3% of the contents.[8][97][98]


The formation of clusters and large-scale filaments in the cold dark matter model with dark energy. The frames show the evolution of structures in a 43 million parsecs (or 140 million light-years) box from redshift of 30 to the present epoch (upper left z=30 to lower right z=0).

A map of the superclusters and voids nearest to Earth
Matter, dark matter, and dark energy are distributed homogeneously throughout the universe over length scales longer than 300 million light-years or so.[99] However, over shorter length-scales, matter tends to clump hierarchically; many atoms are condensed into stars, most stars into galaxies, most galaxies into clusters, superclusters and, finally, large-scale galactic filaments. The observable universe contains as many as 200 billion galaxies[100][101] and, overall, as many as an estimated 1×1024 stars[102][103] (more stars than all the grains of sand on planet Earth).[104] Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million[105] (107) stars up to giants with one trillion[106] (1012) stars. Between the larger structures are voids, which are typically 10–150 Mpc (33 million–490 million ly) in diameter. The Milky Way is in the Local Group of galaxies, which in turn is in the Laniakea Supercluster.[107] This supercluster spans over 500 million light-years, while the Local Group spans over 10 million light-years.[108] The Universe also has vast regions of relative emptiness; the largest known void measures 1.8 billion ly (550 Mpc) across.[109]


Comparison of the contents of the universe today to 380,000 years after the Big Bang as measured with 5 year WMAP data (from 2008).[110] (Due to rounding errors, the sum of these numbers is not 100%). This reflects the 2008 limits of WMAP's ability to define dark matter and dark energy.
The observable universe is isotropic on scales significantly larger than superclusters, meaning that the statistical properties of the universe are the same in all directions as observed from Earth. The universe is bathed in highly isotropic microwave radiation that corresponds to a thermal equilibrium blackbody spectrum of roughly 2.72548 kelvins.[7] The hypothesis that the large-scale universe is homogeneous and isotropic is known as the cosmological principle.[111] A universe that is both homogeneous and isotropic looks the same from all vantage points[112] and has no center.[113]

Dark energy
Main article: Dark energy
An explanation for why the expansion of the universe is accelerating remains elusive. It is often attributed to "dark energy", an unknown form of energy that is hypothesized to permeate space.[114] On a mass–energy equivalence basis, the density of dark energy (~ 7 × 10−30 g/cm3) is much less than the density of ordinary matter or dark matter within galaxies. However, in the present dark-energy era, it dominates the mass–energy of the universe because it is uniform across space.[115][116]

Two proposed forms for dark energy are the cosmological constant, a constant energy density filling space homogeneously,[117] and scalar fields such as quintessence or moduli, dynamic quantities whose energy density can vary in time and space. Contributions from scalar fields that are constant in space are usually also included in the cosmological constant. The cosmological constant can be formulated to be equivalent to vacuum energy. Scalar fields having only a slight amount of spatial inhomogeneity would be difficult to distinguish from a cosmological constant.

Dark matter
Main article: Dark matter
Dark matter is a hypothetical kind of matter that is invisible to the entire electromagnetic spectrum, but which accounts for most of the matter in the universe. The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter, radiation, and the large-scale structure of the universe. Other than neutrinos, a form of hot dark matter, dark matter has not been detected directly, making it one of the greatest mysteries in modern astrophysics. Dark matter neither emits nor absorbs light or any other electromagnetic radiation at any significant level. Dark matter is estimated to constitute 26.8% of the total mass–energy and 84.5% of the total matter in the universe.[97][118]

Ordinary matter
Main article: Matter
The remaining 4.9% of the mass–energy of the universe is ordinary matter, that is, atoms, ions, electrons and the objects they form. This matter includes stars, which produce nearly all of the light we see from galaxies, as well as interstellar gas in the interstellar and intergalactic media, planets, and all the objects from everyday life that we can bump into, touch or squeeze.[119] As a matter of fact, the great majority of ordinary matter in the universe is unseen, since visible stars and gas inside galaxies and clusters account for less than 10 per cent of the ordinary matter contribution to the mass–energy density of the universe.[120][121][122]

Ordinary matter commonly exists in four states (or phases): solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.[123] However, advances in experimental techniques have revealed other previously theoretical phases, such as Bose–Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates.[124][125]

Ordinary matter is composed of two types of elementary particles: quarks and leptons.[126] For example, the proton is formed of two up quarks and one down quark; the neutron is formed of two down quarks and one up quark; and the electron is a kind of lepton. An atom consists of an atomic nucleus, made up of protons and neutrons (both of which are baryons), and electrons that orbit the nucleus.[46]: 1476  Because most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus, which is made up of baryons, astronomers often use the term baryonic matter to describe ordinary matter, although a small fraction of this "baryonic matter" is electrons.

Soon after the Big Bang, primordial protons and neutrons formed from the quark–gluon plasma of the early universe as it cooled below two trillion degrees. A few minutes later, in a process known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, nuclei formed from the primordial protons and neutrons. This nucleosynthesis formed lighter elements, those with small atomic numbers up to lithium and beryllium, but the abundance of heavier elements dropped off sharply with increasing atomic number. Some boron may have been formed at this time, but the next heavier element, carbon, was not formed in significant amounts. Big Bang nucleosynthesis shut down after about 20 minutes due to the rapid drop in temperature and density of the expanding universe. Subsequent formation of heavier elements resulted from stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis.[127]

Particles
A four-by-four table of particles. Columns are three generations of matter (fermions) and one of forces (bosons). In the first three columns, two rows contain quarks and two leptons. The top two rows' columns contain up (u) and down (d) quarks, charm (c) and strange (s) quarks, top (t) and bottom (b) quarks, and photon (γ) and gluon (g), respectively. The bottom two rows' columns contain electron neutrino (ν sub e) and electron (e), muon neutrino (ν sub μ) and muon (μ), and tau neutrino (ν sub τ) and tau (τ), and Z sup 0 and W sup ± weak force. Mass, charge, and spin are listed for each particle.
Standard model of elementary particles: the 12 fundamental fermions and 4 fundamental bosons. Brown loops indicate which bosons (red) couple to which fermions (purple and green). Columns are three generations of matter (fermions) and one of forces (bosons). In the first three columns, two rows contain quarks and two leptons. The top two rows' columns contain up (u) and down (d) quarks, charm (c) and strange (s) quarks, top (t) and bottom (b) quarks, and photon (γ) and gluon (g), respectively. The bottom two rows' columns contain electron neutrino (νe) and electron (e), muon neutrino (νμ) and muon (μ), tau neutrino (ντ) and tau (τ), and the Z0 and W± carriers of the weak force. Mass, charge, and spin are listed for each particle.
Main article: Particle physics
Ordinary matter and the forces that act on matter can be described in terms of elementary particles.[128] These particles are sometimes described as being fundamental, since they have an unknown substructure, and it is unknown whether or not they are composed of smaller and even more fundamental particles.[129][130] In most contemporary models they are thought of as points in space.[131] All elementary particles are currently best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave–particle duality: their behavior has both particle-like and wave-like aspects, with different features dominating under different circumstances.[132] Of central importance is the Standard Model, a theory that is concerned with electromagnetic interactions and the weak and strong nuclear interactions.[133] The Standard Model is supported by the experimental confirmation of the existence of particles that compose matter: quarks and leptons, and their corresponding "antimatter" duals, as well as the force particles that mediate interactions: the photon, the W and Z bosons, and the gluon.[129] The Standard Model predicted the existence of the recently discovered Higgs boson, a particle that is a manifestation of a field within the universe that can endow particles with mass.[134][135] Because of its success in explaining a wide variety of experimental results, the Standard Model is sometimes regarded as a "theory of almost everything".[133] The Standard Model does not, however, accommodate gravity. A true force–particle "theory of everything" has not been attained.[136]

Hadrons
Main article: Hadron
A hadron is a composite particle made of quarks held together by the strong force. Hadrons are categorized into two families: baryons (such as protons and neutrons) made of three quarks, and mesons (such as pions) made of one quark and one antiquark. Of the hadrons, protons are stable, and neutrons bound within atomic nuclei are stable. Other hadrons are unstable under ordinary conditions and are thus insignificant constituents of the modern universe.[137]: 118–123  From approximately 10−6 seconds after the Big Bang, during a period known as the hadron epoch, the temperature of the universe had fallen sufficiently to allow quarks to bind together into hadrons, and the mass of the universe was dominated by hadrons. Initially, the temperature was high enough to allow the formation of hadron–anti-hadron pairs, which kept matter and antimatter in thermal equilibrium. However, as the temperature of the universe continued to fall, hadron–anti-hadron pairs were no longer produced. Most of the hadrons and anti-hadrons were then eliminated in particle–antiparticle annihilation reactions, leaving a small residual of hadrons by the time the universe was about one second old.[137]: 244–266 

Leptons
Main article: Lepton
A lepton is an elementary, half-integer spin particle that does not undergo strong interactions but is subject to the Pauli exclusion principle; no two leptons of the same species can be in exactly the same state at the same time.[138] Two main classes of leptons exist: charged leptons (also known as the electron-like leptons), and neutral leptons (better known as neutrinos). Electrons are stable and the most common charged lepton in the universe, whereas muons and taus are unstable particles that quickly decay after being produced in high energy collisions, such as those involving cosmic rays or carried out in particle accelerators.[139][140] Charged leptons can combine with other particles to form various composite particles such as atoms and positronium. The electron governs nearly all of chemistry, as it is found in atoms and is directly tied to all chemical properties. Neutrinos rarely interact with anything, and are consequently rarely observed. Neutrinos stream throughout the universe but rarely interact with normal matter.[141]

The lepton epoch was the period in the evolution of the early universe in which the leptons dominated the mass of the universe. It started roughly 1 second after the Big Bang, after the majority of hadrons and anti-hadrons annihilated each other at the end of the hadron epoch. During the lepton epoch the temperature of the universe was still high enough to create lepton–anti-lepton pairs, so leptons and anti-leptons were in thermal equilibrium. Approximately 10 seconds after the Big Bang, the temperature of the universe had fallen to the point where lepton–anti-lepton pairs were no longer created.[142] Most leptons and anti-leptons were then eliminated in annihilation reactions, leaving a small residue of leptons. The mass of the universe was then dominated by photons as it entered the following photon epoch.[143][144]

Photons
Main article: Photon epoch
See also: Photino
A photon is the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation. It is the carrier for the electromagnetic force. The effects of this force are easily observable at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level because the photon has zero rest mass; this allows long distance interactions.[46]: 1470 

The photon epoch started after most leptons and anti-leptons were annihilated at the end of the lepton epoch, about 10 seconds after the Big Bang. Atomic nuclei were created in the process of nucleosynthesis which occurred during the first few minutes of the photon epoch. For the remainder of the photon epoch the universe contained a hot dense plasma of nuclei, electrons and photons. About 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the temperature of the Universe fell to the point where nuclei could combine with electrons to create neutral atoms. As a result, photons no longer interacted frequently with matter and the universe became transparent. The highly redshifted photons from this period form the cosmic microwave background. Tiny variations in temperature and density detectable in the CMB were the early "seeds" from which all subsequent structure formation took place.[137]: 244–266 

vte
Timeline of the Big Bang
Cosmological models
Model of the universe based on general relativity
Main article: Solutions of the Einstein field equations
See also: Big Bang and Ultimate fate of the universe
General relativity is the geometric theory of gravitation published by Albert Einstein in 1915 and the current description of gravitation in modern physics. It is the basis of current cosmological models of the universe. General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time, or spacetime. In particular, the curvature of spacetime is directly related to the energy and momentum of whatever matter and radiation are present. The relation is specified by the Einstein field equations, a system of partial differential equations. In general relativity, the distribution of matter and energy determines the geometry of spacetime, which in turn describes the acceleration of matter. Therefore, solutions of the Einstein field equations describe the evolution of the universe. Combined with measurements of the amount, type, and distribution of matter in the universe, the equations of general relativity describe the evolution of the universe over time.[145]

With the assumption of the cosmological principle that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic everywhere, a specific solution of the field equations that describes the universe is the metric tensor called the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric,

where (r, θ, φ) correspond to a spherical coordinate system. This metric has only two undetermined parameters. An overall dimensionless length scale factor R describes the size scale of the universe as a function of time (an increase in R is the expansion of the universe),[146] and a curvature index k describes the geometry. The index k is defined so that it can take only one of three values: 0, corresponding to flat Euclidean geometry; 1, corresponding to a space of positive curvature; or −1, corresponding to a space of positive or negative curvature.[147] The value of R as a function of time t depends upon k and the cosmological constant Λ.[145] The cosmological constant represents the energy density of the vacuum of space and could be related to dark energy.[98] The equation describing how R varies with time is known as the Friedmann equation after its inventor, Alexander Friedmann.[148]

The solutions for R(t) depend on k and Λ, but some qualitative features of such solutions are general. First and most importantly, the length scale R of the universe can remain constant only if the universe is perfectly isotropic with positive curvature (k=1) and has one precise value of density everywhere, as first noted by Albert Einstein.[145] However, this equilibrium is unstable: if the density were slightly different from the needed value, at any place, the difference would be amplified over time.

Second, all solutions suggest that there was a gravitational singularity in the past, when R went to zero and matter and energy were infinitely dense. It may seem that this conclusion is uncertain because it is based on the questionable assumptions of perfect homogeneity and isotropy (the cosmological principle) and that only the gravitational interaction is significant. However, the Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems show that a singularity should exist for very general conditions. Hence, according to Einstein's field equations, R grew rapidly from an unimaginably hot, dense state that existed immediately following this singularity (when R had a small, finite value); this is the essence of the Big Bang model of the universe. Understanding the singularity of the Big Bang likely requires a quantum theory of gravity, which has not yet been formulated.[149]

Third, the curvature index k determines the sign of the curvature of constant-time spatial surfaces[147] averaged over sufficiently large length scales (greater than about a billion light-years). If k=1, the curvature is positive and the universe has a finite volume.[150] A universe with positive curvature is often visualized as a three-dimensional sphere embedded in a four-dimensional space. Conversely, if k is zero or negative, the universe has an infinite volume.[150] It may seem counter-intuitive that an infinite and yet infinitely dense universe could be created in a single instant when R = 0, but exactly that is predicted mathematically when k is nonpositive and the cosmological principle is satisfied. By analogy, an infinite plane has zero curvature but infinite area, whereas an infinite cylinder is finite in one direction and a torus is finite in both. A toroidal universe could behave like a normal universe with periodic boundary conditions.

The ultimate fate of the universe is still unknown because it depends critically on the curvature index k and the cosmological constant Λ. If the universe were sufficiently dense, k would equal +1, meaning that its average curvature throughout is positive and the universe will eventually recollapse in a Big Crunch,[151] possibly starting a new universe in a Big Bounce. Conversely, if the universe were insufficiently dense, k would equal 0 or −1 and the universe would expand forever, cooling off and eventually reaching the Big Freeze and the heat death of the universe.[145] Modern data suggests that the expansion of the universe is accelerating; if this acceleration is sufficiently rapid, the universe may eventually reach a Big Rip. Observationally, the universe appears to be flat (k = 0), with an overall density that is very close to the critical value between recollapse and eternal expansion.[152]

Multiverse hypotheses
Main articles: Multiverse, Many-worlds interpretation, and Bubble universe theory
See also: Eternal inflation
Some speculative theories have proposed that our universe is but one of a set of disconnected universes, collectively denoted as the multiverse, challenging or enhancing more limited definitions of the universe.[19][153] Scientific multiverse models are distinct from concepts such as alternate planes of consciousness and simulated reality.

Max Tegmark developed a four-part classification scheme for the different types of multiverses that scientists have suggested in response to various problems in physics. An example of such multiverses is the one resulting from the chaotic inflation model of the early universe.[154] Another is the multiverse resulting from the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. In this interpretation, parallel worlds are generated in a manner similar to quantum superposition and decoherence, with all states of the wave functions being realized in separate worlds. Effectively, in the many-worlds interpretation the multiverse evolves as a universal wavefunction. If the Big Bang that created our multiverse created an ensemble of multiverses, the wave function of the ensemble would be entangled in this sense.[155] Whether scientifically meaningful probabilities can be extracted from this picture has been and continues to be a topic of much debate, and multiple versions of the many-worlds interpretation exist.[156][157][158] (The subject of the interpretation of quantum mechanics is in general marked by disagreement.[159][160][161])

The least controversial, but still highly disputed, category of multiverse in Tegmark's scheme is Level I. The multiverses of this level are composed by distant spacetime events "in our own universe". Tegmark and others[162] have argued that, if space is infinite, or sufficiently large and uniform, identical instances of the history of Earth's entire Hubble volume occur every so often, simply by chance. Tegmark calculated that our nearest so-called doppelgänger is 1010115 metres away from us (a double exponential function larger than a googolplex).[163][164] However, the arguments used are of speculative nature.[165] Additionally, it would be impossible to scientifically verify the existence of an identical Hubble volume.

It is possible to conceive of disconnected spacetimes, each existing but unable to interact with one another.[163][166] An easily visualized metaphor of this concept is a group of separate soap bubbles, in which observers living on one soap bubble cannot interact with those on other soap bubbles, even in principle.[167] According to one common terminology, each "soap bubble" of spacetime is denoted as a universe, whereas humans' particular spacetime is denoted as the universe,[19] just as humans call Earth's moon the Moon. The entire collection of these separate spacetimes is denoted as the multiverse.[19] With this terminology, different universes are not causally connected to each other.[19] In principle, the other unconnected universes may have different dimensionalities and topologies of spacetime, different forms of matter and energy, and different physical laws and physical constants, although such possibilities are purely speculative.[19] Others consider each of several bubbles created as part of chaotic inflation to be separate universes, though in this model these universes all share a causal origin.[19]

Historical conceptions
See also: Cosmology, Timeline of cosmological theories, Nicolaus Copernicus § Copernican system, and Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica § Beginnings of the Scientific Revolution
Historically, there have been many ideas of the cosmos (cosmologies) and its origin (cosmogonies). Theories of an impersonal universe governed by physical laws were first proposed by the Greeks and Indians.[13] Ancient Chinese philosophy encompassed the notion of the universe including both all of space and all of time.[168] Over the centuries, improvements in astronomical observations and theories of motion and gravitation led to ever more accurate descriptions of the universe. The modern era of cosmology began with Albert Einstein's 1915 general theory of relativity, which made it possible to quantitatively predict the origin, evolution, and conclusion of the universe as a whole. Most modern, accepted theories of cosmology are based on general relativity and, more specifically, the predicted Big Bang.[169]

Mythologies
Main articles: Creation myth, Cosmogony, and Religious cosmology
Many cultures have stories describing the origin of the world and universe. Cultures generally regard these stories as having some truth. There are however many differing beliefs in how these stories apply amongst those believing in a supernatural origin, ranging from a god directly creating the universe as it is now to a god just setting the "wheels in motion" (for example via mechanisms such as the big bang and evolution).[170]

Ethnologists and anthropologists who study myths have developed various classification schemes for the various themes that appear in creation stories.[171][172] For example, in one type of story, the world is born from a world egg; such stories include the Finnish epic poem Kalevala, the Chinese story of Pangu or the Indian Brahmanda Purana. In related stories, the universe is created by a single entity emanating or producing something by him- or herself, as in the Tibetan Buddhism concept of Adi-Buddha, the ancient Greek story of Gaia (Mother Earth), the Aztec goddess Coatlicue myth, the ancient Egyptian god Atum story, and the Judeo-Christian Genesis creation narrative in which the Abrahamic God created the universe. In another type of story, the universe is created from the union of male and female deities, as in the Maori story of Rangi and Papa. In other stories, the universe is created by crafting it from pre-existing materials, such as the corpse of a dead god—as from Tiamat in the Babylonian epic Enuma Elish or from the giant Ymir in Norse mythology—or from chaotic materials, as in Izanagi and Izanami in Japanese mythology. In other stories, the universe emanates from fundamental principles, such as Brahman and Prakrti, the creation myth of the Serers,[173] or the yin and yang of the Tao.

Philosophical models
Further information: Cosmology
See also: Pre-Socratic philosophy, Physics (Aristotle), Hindu cosmology, Islamic cosmology, and Philosophy of space and time
The pre-Socratic Greek philosophers and Indian philosophers developed some of the earliest philosophical concepts of the universe.[13][174] The earliest Greek philosophers noted that appearances can be deceiving, and sought to understand the underlying reality behind the appearances. In particular, they noted the ability of matter to change forms (e.g., ice to water to steam) and several philosophers proposed that all the physical materials in the world are different forms of a single primordial material, or arche. The first to do so was Thales, who proposed this material to be water. Thales' student, Anaximander, proposed that everything came from the limitless apeiron. Anaximenes proposed the primordial material to be air on account of its perceived attractive and repulsive qualities that cause the arche to condense or dissociate into different forms. Anaxagoras proposed the principle of Nous (Mind), while Heraclitus proposed fire (and spoke of logos). Empedocles proposed the elements to be earth, water, air and fire. His four-element model became very popular. Like Pythagoras, Plato believed that all things were composed of number, with Empedocles' elements taking the form of the Platonic solids. Democritus, and later philosophers—most notably Leucippus—proposed that the universe is composed of indivisible atoms moving through a void (vacuum), although Aristotle did not believe that to be feasible because air, like water, offers resistance to motion. Air will immediately rush in to fill a void, and moreover, without resistance, it would do so indefinitely fast.[13]

Although Heraclitus argued for eternal change,[175] his contemporary Parmenides emphasized changelessness. Parmenides' poem On Nature has been read as saying that all change is an illusion, that the true underlying reality is eternally unchanging and of a single nature, or at least that the essential feature of each thing that exists must exist eternally, without origin, change, or end.[176] His student Zeno of Elea challenged everyday ideas about motion with several famous paradoxes. Aristotle responded to these paradoxes by developing the notion of a potential countable infinity, as well as the infinitely divisible continuum.[177][178] Unlike the eternal and unchanging cycles of time, he believed that the world is bounded by the celestial spheres and that cumulative stellar magnitude is only finitely multiplicative.

The Indian philosopher Kanada, founder of the Vaisheshika school, developed a notion of atomism and proposed that light and heat were varieties of the same substance.[179] In the 5th century AD, the Buddhist atomist philosopher Dignāga proposed atoms to be point-sized, durationless, and made of energy. They denied the existence of substantial matter and proposed that movement consisted of momentary flashes of a stream of energy.[180]

The notion of temporal finitism was inspired by the doctrine of creation shared by the three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The Christian philosopher, John Philoponus, presented the philosophical arguments against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite past and future. Philoponus' arguments against an infinite past were used by the early Muslim philosopher, Al-Kindi (Alkindus); the Jewish philosopher, Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph); and the Muslim theologian, Al-Ghazali (Algazel).[181]

Pantheism is the philosophical religious belief that the universe itself is identical to divinity and a supreme being or entity.[182] Ehe physical universe is thus understood as an all-encompassing, immanent deity.[183] The term 'pantheist' designates one who holds both that everything constitutes a unity and that this unity is divine, consisting of an all-encompassing, manifested god or goddess.[184][185] Pantheistic concepts date back thousands of years, and pantheistic elements have been identified in various religious traditions.

Astronomical concepts
Main articles: History of astronomy and Timeline of astronomy

3rd century BCE calculations by Aristarchus on the relative sizes of, from left to right, the Sun, Earth, and Moon, from a 10th-century AD Greek copy
The earliest written records of identifiable predecessors to modern astronomy come from Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia from around 3000 to 1200 BCE.[186][187] Babylonian astronomers of the 7th century BCE viewed the world as a flat disk surrounded by the ocean,[188][189] and this forms the premise for early Greek maps like those of Anaximander and Hecataeus of Miletus.

Later Greek philosophers, observing the motions of the heavenly bodies, were concerned with developing models of the universe based more profoundly on empirical evidence. The first coherent model was proposed by Eudoxus of Cnidos, a student of Plato who followed Plato's idea that heavenly motions had to be circular. In order to account for the known complications of the planets' motions, particularly retrograde movement, Eudoxus' model included 27 different celestial spheres: four for each of the planets visible to the naked eye, three each for the Sun and the Moon, and one for the stars. All of these spheres were centered on the Earth, which remained motionless while they rotated eternally. Aristotle elaborated upon this model, increasing the number of spheres to 55 in order to account for further details of planetary motion. For Aristotle, normal matter was entirely contained within the terrestrial sphere, and it obeyed fundamentally different rules from heavenly material.[190][191]

The post-Aristotle treatise De Mundo (of uncertain authorship and date) stated, "Five elements, situated in spheres in five regions, the less being in each case surrounded by the greater—namely, earth surrounded by water, water by air, air by fire, and fire by ether—make up the whole universe".[192]

This model was also refined by Callippus and after concentric spheres were abandoned, it was brought into nearly perfect agreement with astronomical observations by Ptolemy.[193] The success of such a model is largely due to the mathematical fact that any function (such as the position of a planet) can be decomposed into a set of circular functions (the Fourier modes). Other Greek scientists, such as the Pythagorean philosopher Philolaus, postulated (according to Stobaeus' account) that at the center of the universe was a "central fire" around which the Earth, Sun, Moon and planets revolved in uniform circular motion.[194]

The Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known individual to propose a heliocentric model of the universe. Though the original text has been lost, a reference in Archimedes' book The Sand Reckoner describes Aristarchus's heliocentric model. Archimedes wrote:

You, King Gelon, are aware the universe is the name given by most astronomers to the sphere the center of which is the center of the Earth, while its radius is equal to the straight line between the center of the Sun and the center of the Earth. This is the common account as you have heard from astronomers. But Aristarchus has brought out a book consisting of certain hypotheses, wherein it appears, as a consequence of the assumptions made, that the universe is many times greater than the universe just mentioned. His hypotheses are that the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, that the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle, the Sun lying in the middle of the orbit, and that the sphere of fixed stars, situated about the same center as the Sun, is so great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the center of the sphere bears to its surface.[195]
Aristarchus thus believed the stars to be very far away, and saw this as the reason why stellar parallax had not been observed, that is, the stars had not been observed to move relative each other as the Earth moved around the Sun. The stars are in fact much farther away than the distance that was generally assumed in ancient times, which is why stellar parallax is only detectable with precision instruments. The geocentric model, consistent with planetary parallax, was assumed to be the explanation for the unobservability of stellar parallax.[196]


Flammarion engraving, Paris 1888
The only other astronomer from antiquity known by name who supported Aristarchus's heliocentric model was Seleucus of Seleucia, a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus.[197][198][199] According to Plutarch, Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning, but it is not known what arguments he used. Seleucus' arguments for a heliocentric cosmology were probably related to the phenomenon of tides.[200] According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun.[201] Alternatively, he may have proved heliocentricity by determining the constants of a geometric model for it, and by developing methods to compute planetary positions using this model, like what Nicolaus Copernicus later did in the 16th century.[202] During the Middle Ages, heliocentric models were also proposed by the Persian astronomers Albumasar[203] and Al-Sijzi.[204]


Model of the Copernican Universe by Thomas Digges in 1576, with the amendment that the stars are no longer confined to a sphere, but spread uniformly throughout the space surrounding the planets
The Aristotelian model was accepted in the Western world for roughly two millennia, until Copernicus revived Aristarchus's perspective that the astronomical data could be explained more plausibly if the Earth rotated on its axis and if the Sun were placed at the center of the universe.[205]

In the center rests the Sun. For who would place this lamp of a very beautiful temple in another or better place than this wherefrom it can illuminate everything at the same time?

— Nicolaus Copernicus, in Chapter 10, Book 1 of De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestrum (1543)
As noted by Copernicus himself, the notion that the Earth rotates is very old, dating at least to Philolaus (c. 450 BC), Heraclides Ponticus (c. 350 BC) and Ecphantus the Pythagorean. Roughly a century before Copernicus, the Christian scholar Nicholas of Cusa also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book, On Learned Ignorance (1440).[206] Al-Sijzi[207] also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis. Empirical evidence for the Earth's rotation on its axis, using the phenomenon of comets, was given by Tusi (1201–1274) and Ali Qushji (1403–1474).[208]

This cosmology was accepted by Isaac Newton, Christiaan Huygens and later scientists.[209] Newton demonstrated that the same laws of motion and gravity apply to earthly and to celestial matter, making Aristotle's division between the two obsolete. Edmund Halley (1720)[210] and Jean-Philippe de Chéseaux (1744)[211] noted independently that the assumption of an infinite space filled uniformly with stars would lead to the prediction that the nighttime sky would be as bright as the Sun itself; this became known as Olbers' paradox in the 19th century.[212] Newton believed that an infinite space uniformly filled with matter would cause infinite forces and instabilities causing the matter to be crushed inwards under its own gravity.[209] This instability was clarified in 1902 by the Jeans instability criterion.[213] One solution to these paradoxes is the Charlier Universe, in which the matter is arranged hierarchically (systems of orbiting bodies that are themselves orbiting in a larger system, ad infinitum) in a fractal way such that the universe has a negligibly small overall density; such a cosmological model had also been proposed earlier in 1761 by Johann Heinrich Lambert.[53][214]

During the 18th century, Immanuel Kant speculated that nebulae could be entire galaxies separate from the Milky Way,[210] and in 1850, Alexander von Humboldt called these separate galaxies Weltinseln, or "world islands", a term that later developed into "island universes".[215][216] In 1919, when the Hooker Telescope was completed, the prevailing view still was that the universe consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope, Edwin Hubble identified Cepheid variables in several spiral nebulae and in 1922–1923 proved conclusively that Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum among others, were entire galaxies outside our own, thus proving that the universe consists of a multitude of galaxies.[217]

The modern era of physical cosmology began in 1917, when Albert Einstein first applied his general theory of relativity to model the structure and dynamics of the universe.[218] The discoveries of this era, and the questions that remain unanswered, are outlined in the sections above.


India, officially the Republic of India (ISO: Bhārat Gaṇarājya),[21] is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area; the most populous country as of June 2023;[22][23] and from the time of its independence in 1947, the world's most populous democracy.[24][25][26] Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west;[j] China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives; its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand, Myanmar, and Indonesia.

Modern humans arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa no later than 55,000 years ago.[27][28][29] Their long occupation, initially in varying forms of isolation as hunter-gatherers, has made the region highly diverse, second only to Africa in human genetic diversity.[30] Settled life emerged on the subcontinent in the western margins of the Indus river basin 9,000 years ago, evolving gradually into the Indus Valley Civilisation of the third millennium BCE.[31] By 1200 BCE, an archaic form of Sanskrit, an Indo-European language, had diffused into India from the northwest.[32][33] Its evidence today is found in the hymns of the Rigveda. Preserved by an oral tradition that was resolutely vigilant, the Rigveda records the dawning of Hinduism in India.[34] The Dravidian languages of India were supplanted in the northern and western regions.[35] By 400 BCE, stratification and exclusion by caste had emerged within Hinduism,[36] and Buddhism and Jainism had arisen, proclaiming social orders unlinked to heredity.[37] Early political consolidations gave rise to the loose-knit Maurya and Gupta Empires based in the Ganges Basin.[38] Their collective era was suffused with wide-ranging creativity,[39] but also marked by the declining status of women,[40] and the incorporation of untouchability into an organised system of belief.[k][41] In South India, the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian-languages scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of Southeast Asia.[42]

In the early medieval era, Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism became established on India's southern and western coasts.[43] Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's northern plains,[44] eventually founding the Delhi Sultanate, and drawing northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam.[45] In the 15th century, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture in south India.[46] In the Punjab, Sikhism emerged, rejecting institutionalised religion.[47] The Mughal Empire, in 1526, ushered in two centuries of relative peace,[48] leaving a legacy of luminous architecture.[l][49] Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company followed, turning India into a colonial economy, but also consolidating its sovereignty.[50] British Crown rule began in 1858. The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly,[51][52] but technological changes were introduced, and modern ideas of education and the public life took root.[53] A pioneering and influential nationalist movement emerged, which was noted for nonviolent resistance and became the major factor in ending British rule.[54][55] In 1947 the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions,[56][57][58][59] a Hindu-majority Dominion of India and a Muslim-majority Dominion of Pakistan, amid large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration.[60]

India has been a federal republic since 1950, governed through a democratic parliamentary system. It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society. India's population grew from 361 million in 1951 to almost 1.4 billion in 2022.[61] During the same time, its nominal per capita income increased from US$64 annually to US$2,601, and its literacy rate from 16.6% to 74%. From being a comparatively destitute country in 1951,[62] India has become a fast-growing major economy and a hub for information technology services, with an expanding middle class.[63] Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture.[64] India has substantially reduced its rate of poverty, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality.[65] India is a nuclear-weapon state, which ranks high in military expenditure. It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China, unresolved since the mid-20th century.[66] Among the socio-economic challenges India faces are gender inequality, child malnutrition,[67] and rising levels of air pollution.[68] India's land is megadiverse, with four biodiversity hotspots.[69] Its forest cover comprises 21.7% of its area.[70] India's wildlife, which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in India's culture,[71] is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats.

Etymology
Main article: Names for India
According to the Oxford English Dictionary (third edition 2009), the name "India" is derived from the Classical Latin India, a reference to South Asia and an uncertain region to its east. In turn the name "India" derived successively from Hellenistic Greek India ( Ἰνδία), ancient Greek Indos ( Ἰνδός), Old Persian Hindush (an eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire), and ultimately its cognate, the Sanskrit Sindhu, or "river", specifically the Indus River and, by implication, its well-settled southern basin.[72][73] The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as Indoi (Ἰνδοί), which translates as "The people of the Indus".[74]

The term Bharat (Bhārat; pronounced [ˈbʱaːɾət] i), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India,[75][76] is used in its variations by many Indian languages. A modern rendering of the historical name Bharatavarsha, which applied originally to North India,[77][78] Bharat gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India.[75][79]

Hindustan ([ɦɪndʊˈstaːn] i) is a Middle Persian name for India that became popular by the 13th century,[80] and was used widely since the era of Mughal Empire. The meaning of Hindustan has varied, referring to a region encompassing present-day northern India and Pakistan or to India in its near entirety.[75][79][81]

History
Main articles: History of India and History of the Republic of India
Ancient India

Manuscript illustration, c. 1650, of the Sanskrit epic Ramayana, composed in story-telling fashion c. 400 BCE – c. 300 CE[82]
By 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or Homo sapiens, had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa, where they had earlier evolved.[27][28][29] The earliest known modern human remains in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago.[27] After 6500 BCE, evidence for domestication of food crops and animals, construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus appeared in Mehrgarh and other sites in Balochistan, Pakistan.[83] These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation,[84][83] the first urban culture in South Asia,[85] which flourished during 2500–1900 BCE in Pakistan and western India.[86] Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.[85]

During the period 2000–500 BCE, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic cultures to the Iron Age ones.[87] The Vedas, the oldest scriptures associated with Hinduism,[88] were composed during this period,[89] and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain.[87] Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent from the north-west.[88] The caste system, which created a hierarchy of priests, warriors, and free peasants, but which excluded indigenous peoples by labelling their occupations impure, arose during this period.[90] On the Deccan Plateau, archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation.[87] In South India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period,[91] as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.[91]


Cave 26 of the rock-cut Ajanta Caves
In the late Vedic period, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the mahajanapadas.[92][93] The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non-Vedic religious movements, two of which became independent religions. Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira.[94] Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India.[95][96][97] In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal,[98] and both established long-lasting monastic traditions. Politically, by the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Mauryan Empire.[99] The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent except the far south, but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas.[100][101] The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire-building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka's renunciation of militarism and far-flung advocacy of the Buddhist dhamma.[102][103]

The Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between 200 BCE and 200 CE, the southern peninsula was ruled by the Cheras, the Cholas, and the Pandyas, dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and Southeast Asia.[104][105] In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women.[106][99] By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created a complex system of administration and taxation in the greater Ganges Plain; this system became a model for later Indian kingdoms.[107][108] Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion, rather than the management of ritual, began to assert itself.[109] This renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture, which found patrons among an urban elite.[108] Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.[108]

Medieval India

Brihadeshwara temple, Thanjavur, completed in 1010 CE

The Qutub Minar, 73 m (240 ft) tall, completed by the Sultan of Delhi, Iltutmish
The Indian early medieval age, from 600 to 1200 CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity.[110] When Harsha of Kannauj, who ruled much of the Indo-Gangetic Plain from 606 to 647 CE, attempted to expand southwards, he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan.[111] When his successor attempted to expand eastwards, he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal.[111] When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south.[111] No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond their core region.[110] During this time, pastoral peoples, whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy, were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes.[112] The caste system consequently began to show regional differences.[112]

In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language.[113] They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent.[113] Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well.[114] Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation.[114] By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Brunei, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia.[115] Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; South-East Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.[115]

After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206.[116] The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs.[117][118] By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north.[119][120] The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire.[121] Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India,[122] and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.[121]

Early modern India
In the early 16th century, northern India, then under mainly Muslim rulers,[123] fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors.[124] The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule. Instead, it balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices[125][126] and diverse and inclusive ruling elites,[127] leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule.[128] Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar, the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty, expressed through a Persianised culture, to an emperor who had near-divine status.[127] The Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture[129] and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency,[130] caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.[128] The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion,[128] resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture.[131] Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience.[132] Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India.[132] As the empire disintegrated, many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs.[133]


A distant view of the Taj Mahal from the Agra Fort

A two mohur Company gold coin, issued in 1835, the obverse inscribed "William IV, King"
By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts.[134][135] The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly assert its military strength and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies.[136][134][137][138] Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s.[139] India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials. Many historians consider this to be the onset of India's colonial period.[134] By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and having effectively been made an arm of British administration, the East India Company began more consciously to enter non-economic arenas, including education, social reform, and culture.[140]

Modern India
Main article: History of the Republic of India
Historians consider India's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885. The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state. These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens. Technological changes—among them, railways, canals, and the telegraph—were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe.[141][142][143][144] However, disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule.[145][146] Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858, it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and the direct administration of India by the British government. Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest.[147][148] In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885.[149][150][151][152]

The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks, and many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets.[153] There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines,[154] and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians.[155] There were also salutary effects: commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption.[156] The railway network provided critical famine relief,[157] notably reduced the cost of moving goods,[157] and helped nascent Indian-owned industry.[156]


1909 map of the British Indian Empire

Jawaharlal Nehru sharing a light moment with Mahatma Gandhi, Mumbai, 6 July 1946
After World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served,[158] a new period began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mahatma Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol.[159] During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections.[160] The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism. All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan.[161]

Vital to India's self-image as an independent nation was its constitution, completed in 1950, which put in place a secular and democratic republic.[162] Per the London Declaration, India retained its membership of the Commonwealth, becoming the first republic within it.[163] Economic liberalisation, which began in the 1980s and the collaboration with Soviet Union for technical know-how,[164] has created a large urban middle class, transformed India into one of the world's fastest-growing economies,[165] and increased its geopolitical clout. Yet, India is also shaped by seemingly unyielding poverty, both rural and urban;[166] by religious and caste-related violence;[167] by Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies;[168] and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India.[169] It has unresolved territorial disputes with China[170] and with Pakistan.[170] India's sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world's newer nations; however, in spite of its recent economic successes, freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved.[171]

Geography
Main article: Geography of India
India accounts for the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, a part of the Indo-Australian Plate.[172] India's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian Plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east.[172] Simultaneously, the vast Tethyan oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian Plate.[172] These dual processes, driven by convection in the Earth's mantle, both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under-thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas.[172] Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast crescent-shaped trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment[173] and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain.[174] The original Indian plate makes its first appearance above the sediment in the ancient Aravalli range, which extends from the Delhi Ridge in a southwesterly direction. To the west lies the Thar Desert, the eastern spread of which is checked by the Aravallis.[175][176][177]


The Tungabhadra, with rocky outcrops, flows into the peninsular Krishna river.[178]

Fishing boats lashed together in a tidal creek in Anjarle village, Maharashtra
The remaining Indian Plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east.[179] To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau, is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats;[180] the plateau contains the country's oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6° 44′ and 35° 30′ north latitude[m] and 68° 7′ and 97° 25′ east longitude.[181]

India's coastline measures 7,517 kilometres (4,700 mi) in length; of this distance, 5,423 kilometres (3,400 mi) belong to peninsular India and 2,094 kilometres (1,300 mi) to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains.[182] According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores.[182]

Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal.[183] Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi; the latter's extremely low gradient, caused by long-term silt deposition, leads to severe floods and course changes.[184][185] Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari, the Mahanadi, the Kaveri, and the Krishna, which also drain into the Bay of Bengal;[186] and the Narmada and the Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea.[187] Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh.[188] India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.[189]

Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons.[190] The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes.[191][192] The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India's rainfall.[190] Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane.[193]

Temperatures in India have risen by 0.7 °C (1.3 °F) between 1901 and 2018.[194] Climate change in India is often thought to be the cause. The retreat of Himalayan glaciers has adversely affected the flow rate of the major Himalayan rivers, including the Ganges and the Brahmaputra.[195] According to some current projections, the number and severity of droughts in India will have markedly increased by the end of the present century.[196]

Biodiversity
Main articles: Forestry in India and Wildlife of India

India has the majority of the world's wild tigers, approximately 3,170 in 2022.[197]

A Chital (Axis axis) stag in the Nagarhole National Park in a region covered by a moderately dense[n] forest.
India is a megadiverse country, a term employed for 17 countries which display high biological diversity and contain many species exclusively indigenous, or endemic, to them.[198] India is a habitat for 8.6% of all mammal species, 13.7% of bird species, 7.9% of reptile species, 6% of amphibian species, 12.2% of fish species, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species.[199][200] Fully a third of Indian plant species are endemic.[201] India also contains four of the world's 34 biodiversity hotspots,[69] or regions that display significant habitat loss in the presence of high endemism.[o][202]

According to official statistics, India's forest cover is 713,789 km2 (275,595 sq mi), which is 21.71% of the country's total land area.[70] It can be subdivided further into broad categories of canopy density, or the proportion of the area of a forest covered by its tree canopy.[203] Very dense forest, whose canopy density is greater than 70%, occupies 3.02% of India's land area.[203][204] It predominates in the tropical moist forest of the Andaman Islands, the Western Ghats, and Northeast India. Moderately dense forest, whose canopy density is between 40% and 70%, occupies 9.39% of India's land area.[203][204] It predominates in the temperate coniferous forest of the Himalayas, the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India, and the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India.[205] Open forest, whose canopy density is between 10% and 40%, occupies 9.26% of India's land area.[203][204] India has two natural zones of thorn forest, one in the Deccan Plateau, immediately east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain, now turned into rich agricultural land by irrigation, its features no longer visible.[206]

Among the Indian subcontinent's notable indigenous trees are the astringent Azadirachta indica, or neem, which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine,[207] and the luxuriant Ficus religiosa, or peepul,[208] which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro,[209] and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment.[210]

Many Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana, the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago.[211] India's subsequent collision with Eurasia set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms.[212] Still later, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the Himalayas.[213] This had the effect of lowering endemism among India's mammals, which stands at 12.6%, contrasting with 45.8% among reptiles and 55.8% among amphibians.[200] Among endemics are the vulnerable[214] hooded leaf monkey[215] and the threatened[216] Beddome's toad[216][217] of the Western Ghats.


The last three Asiatic cheetahs (on record) in India were shot dead in 1948 in Surguja district, Madhya Pradesh, Central India by Maharajah Ramanuj Pratap Singh Deo. The young males, all from the same litter, were sitting together when they were shot at night.
India contains 172 IUCN-designated threatened animal species, or 2.9% of endangered forms.[218] These include the endangered Bengal tiger and the Ganges river dolphin. Critically endangered species include the gharial, a crocodilian; the great Indian bustard; and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac-treated cattle.[219] Before they were extensively utilized for agriculture and cleared for human settlement, the thorn forests of Punjab were mingled at intervals with open grasslands that were grazed by large herds of blackbuck preyed on by the Asiatic cheetah; the blackbuck, no longer extant in Punjab, is now severely endangered in India, and the cheetah is extinct.[220] The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response, the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was expanded substantially. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act[221] and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988.[222] India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and eighteen biosphere reserves,[223] four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; seventy-five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.[224]

Politics and government
Politics
Main article: Politics of India

As part of Janadesh 2007, 25,000 pro-land reform landless people in Madhya Pradesh listen to Rajagopal P. V.[225]
A parliamentary republic with a multi-party system,[226] India has six recognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress (INC) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and more than 50 regional parties.[227] The Congress is considered centre-left in Indian political culture,[228] and the BJP right-wing.[229][230][231] For most of the period between 1950—when India first became a republic—and the late 1980s, the Congress held a majority in the Parliament. Since then, however, it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP,[232] as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi-party coalition governments at the centre.[233]

In the Republic of India's first three general elections, in 1951, 1957, and 1962, the Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru-led Congress won easy victories. On Nehru's death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded, after his own unexpected death in 1966, by Nehru's daughter Indira Gandhi, who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971. Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; the then-new Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted just over two years. There were two prime ministers during this period; Morarji Desai and Charan Singh. Voted back into power in 1980, the Congress saw a change in leadership in 1984, when Indira Gandhi was assassinated; she was succeeded by her son Rajiv Gandhi, who won an easy victory in the general elections later that year. The Congress was voted out again in 1989 when a National Front coalition, led by the newly formed Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front, won the elections; that government too proved relatively short-lived, lasting just under two years. There were two prime ministers during this period; V.P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar.[234] Elections were held again in 1991; no party won an absolute majority. The Congress, as the largest single party, was able to form a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao.[235]


US president Barack Obama addresses the members of the Parliament of India in New Delhi in November 2010.
A two-year period of political turmoil followed the general election of 1996. Several short-lived alliances shared power at the centre. The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996; it was followed by two comparatively long-lasting United Front coalitions, which depended on external support. There were two prime ministers during this period; H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral. In 1998, the BJP was able to form a successful coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term.[236] Again in the 2004 Indian general elections, no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). It had the support of left-leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India's communist parties.[237] That year, Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term.[238] In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties.[239] In the 2019 general election, the BJP was victorious again. The incumbent prime minister is Narendra Modi, a former chief minister of Gujarat. On 22 July 2022, Droupadi Murmu was elected India's 15th president and took the oath of office on 25 July 2022.[240]

Government
Main articles: Government of India and Constitution of India

Rashtrapati Bhavan, the official residence of the President of India, was designed by British architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker for the Viceroy of India, and constructed between 1911 and 1931 during the British Raj.[241]
India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India—the country's supreme legal document. It is a constitutional republic.

Federalism in India defines the power distribution between the union and the states. The Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950,[242] originally stated India to be a "sovereign, democratic republic;" this characterisation was amended in 1971 to "a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic".[243] India's form of government, traditionally described as "quasi-federal" with a strong centre and weak states,[244] has grown increasingly federal since the late 1990s as a result of political, economic, and social changes.[245][246]

National symbols[1]
Emblem	Sarnath Lion Capital
Anthem	Jana Gana Mana
Song	"Vande Mataram"
Language	None[247][248][249]
Currency	₹ (Indian rupee)
Calendar	Saka
Bird	Indian peafowl
Flower	Lotus
Fruit	Mango
Mammal	
Bengal tiger
River dolphin
Tree	Banyan
River	Ganges
The Government of India comprises three branches:[250]

Executive: The President of India is the ceremonial head of state,[251] who is elected indirectly for a five-year term by an electoral college comprising members of national and state legislatures.[252][253] The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power.[254] Appointed by the president,[255] the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance having a majority of seats in the lower house of parliament.[254] The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice president, and the Union Council of Ministers—with the cabinet being its executive committee—headed by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament.[251] In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and their council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament. Civil servants act as permanent executives and all decisions of the executive are implemented by them.[256]
Legislature: The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament. Operating under a Westminster-style parliamentary system, it comprises an upper house called the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and a lower house called the Lok Sabha (House of the People).[257] The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body of 245 members who serve staggered six-year terms.[258] Most are elected indirectly by the state and union territorial legislatures in numbers proportional to their state's share of the national population.[255] All but two of the Lok Sabha's 545 members are elected directly by popular vote; they represent single-member constituencies for five-year terms.[259] Two seats of parliament, reserved for Anglo-Indians in the article 331, have been scrapped.[260][261]
Judiciary: India has a three-tier unitary independent judiciary[262] comprising the supreme court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 25 high courts, and a large number of trial courts.[262] The supreme court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre and has appellate jurisdiction over the high courts.[263] It has the power to both strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution[264] and invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional.[265]
Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of India
See also: Political integration of India
India is a federal union comprising 28 states and 8 union territories.[13] All states, as well as the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi, have elected legislatures and governments following the Westminster system of governance. The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the central government through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis.[266] There are over a quarter of a million local government bodies at city, town, block, district and village levels.[267]

An organism (from Ancient Greek ὄργανον (órganon) 'instrument, implement, tool', and Ancient Greek -ισμός (-ismós)) is any biological living system that functions as an individual life form.[1] All organisms are composed of cells (cell theory).[1] The idea of organism is based on the concept of minimal functional unit of life. Three traits have been proposed to play the main role in qualification as an organism:

noncompartmentability – structure that cannot be divided without its functionality loss,[2]
individuality – the entity has simultaneous holding of genetic uniqueness, genetic homogeneity and autonomy,[3]
distinctness – genetic information has to maintain open-system (a cell).[4]
Organisms include multicellular animals, plants, and fungi; or unicellular microorganisms such as protists, bacteria, and archaea.[5] All types of organisms are capable of reproduction, growth and development, maintenance, and some degree of response to stimuli. Most multicellular organisms differentiate into specialized tissues and organs during their development.

A unicellular organism may be either a prokaryote or a eukaryote. Prokaryotes are represented by two separate domains – bacteria and archaea. Eukaryotic organisms are characterized by the presence of a membrane-bound cell nucleus and contain additional membrane-bound compartments called organelles (such as mitochondria in animals and plants and plastids in plants and algae, all generally considered to be derived from endosymbiotic bacteria).[6] Fungi, animals and plants are examples of kingdoms of organisms within the eukaryotes.

Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 2 million to 1 trillion,[7] of which over 1.7 million have been documented.[8] More than 99% of all species, amounting to over five billion species,[9] that ever lived are estimated to be extinct.[10][11]

In 2016, a set of 355 genes from the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms from Earth was identified.[12][13]

Etymology
The term "organism" (from Greek ὀργανισμός, organismos, from ὄργανον, organon, i.e. "instrument, implement, tool, organ of sense or apprehension")[14][15] first appeared in the English language in 1703 and took on its current definition by 1834 (Oxford English Dictionary). It is directly related to the term "organization". There is a long tradition of defining organisms as self-organizing beings, going back at least to Immanuel Kant's 1790 Critique of Judgment.[16]

Definitions
An organism may be defined as an assembly of molecules functioning as a more or less stable whole that exhibits the properties of life. Dictionary definitions can be broad, using phrases such as "any living structure, such as a plant, animal, fungus or bacterium, capable of growth and reproduction".[17] Many definitions exclude viruses and possible man-made non-organic life forms, as viruses are dependent on the biochemical machinery of a host cell for reproduction.[18] A superorganism is an organism consisting of many individuals working together as a single functional or social unit.[19]

There has been controversy about the best way to define the organism,[20] and from a philosophical point of view, whether such a definition is necessary.[21][22][23] Problematic cases include colonial organisms: for instance, a colony of eusocial insects fulfils criteria such as adaptive organisation and germ-soma specialisation.[24] If so, the same argument would include some mutualistic and sexual partnerships as organisms.[25] If group selection occurs, then a group could be viewed as a superorganism, optimised by group adaptation.[26] Another view is that attributes like autonomy, genetic homogeneity and genetic uniqueness should be examined separately rather than demanding that an organism should have all of them; if so, there are multiple dimensions to biological individuality, resulting in several types of organism.[27]

Other views include the idea that an individual is distinguished by its immune response, separating self from foreign;[28] that "anti-entropy", the ability to maintain order, is what distinguishes an organism;[29] or that Shannon's information theory can be used to identify organisms as capable of self-maintaining their information content.[4] Finally, it may be that the concept of the organism is inadequate in biology.[30]

Viruses
Main article: Non-cellular life
Viruses are not typically considered to be organisms because they are incapable of autonomous reproduction, growth or metabolism. Although some organisms are also incapable of independent survival and live as obligatory intracellular parasites, they are capable of independent metabolism and procreation. Although viruses have a few enzymes and molecules characteristic of living organisms, they have no metabolism of their own; they cannot synthesize and organize the organic compounds from which they are formed. Naturally, this rules out autonomous reproduction: they can only be passively replicated by the machinery of the host cell. In this sense, they are similar to inanimate matter.[31] Viruses have their own genes, and they evolve. Thus, an argument that viruses should be classed as living organisms is their ability to undergo evolution and replicate through self-assembly. However, some scientists argue that viruses neither evolve nor self-reproduce. Instead, viruses are evolved by their host cells, meaning that there was co-evolution of viruses and host cells. If host cells did not exist, viral evolution would be impossible. This is not true for cells. If viruses did not exist, the direction of cellular evolution could be different, but cells would nevertheless be able to evolve. As for reproduction, viruses rely on hosts' machinery to replicate. The discovery of viruses with genes coding for energy metabolism and protein synthesis fuelled the debate about whether viruses are living organisms. The presence of these genes suggested that viruses were once able to metabolize. However, it was found later that the genes coding for energy and protein metabolism have a cellular origin. Most likely, these genes were acquired through horizontal gene transfer from viral hosts.[31]

All organisms consist of structural units called cells; some contain a single cell (unicellular) and others contain many units (multicellular). Multicellular organisms are able to specialize cells to perform specific functions. A group of such cells is a tissue, and in animals these occur as four basic types, namely epithelium, nervous tissue, muscle tissue, and connective tissue. Several types of tissue work together in the form of an organ to produce a particular function (such as the pumping of the blood by the heart, or as a barrier to the environment as the skin). This pattern continues to a higher level with several organs functioning as an organ system such as the reproductive system, and digestive system. Many multicellular organisms consist of several organ systems, which coordinate to allow for life.

Cell
The cell theory, first developed in 1839 by Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells; all cells come from preexisting cells, and cells contain the hereditary information necessary for regulating cell functions and for transmitting information to the next generation of cells.

There are two types of cells, eukaryotic and prokaryotic. Prokaryotic cells are usually singletons, while eukaryotic cells are usually found in multicellular organisms. Prokaryotic cells lack a nuclear membrane so DNA is unbound within the cell; eukaryotic cells have nuclear membranes.

All cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, have a membrane, which envelops the cell, separates its interior from its environment, regulates what moves in and out, and maintains the electric potential of the cell. Inside the membrane, a salty cytoplasm takes up most of the cell volume. All cells possess DNA, the hereditary material of genes, and RNA, containing the information necessary to build various proteins such as enzymes, the cell's primary machinery. There are also other kinds of biomolecules in cells.

All cells share several similar characteristics of:[32]

Reproduction by cell division (binary fission, mitosis or meiosis).
Use of enzymes and other proteins coded by DNA genes and made via messenger RNA intermediates and ribosomes.
Metabolism, including taking in raw materials, building cell components, converting energy, molecules and releasing by-products. The functioning of a cell depends upon its ability to extract and use chemical energy stored in organic molecules. This energy is derived from metabolic pathways.
Response to external and internal stimuli such as changes in temperature, pH or nutrient levels.
Cell contents are contained within a cell surface membrane that contains proteins and a lipid bilayer.
Evolutionary history
See also: Origin of life, Earliest known life forms, and Common descent
Last universal common ancestor
Main article: Last universal common ancestor
Further information: Timeline of the evolutionary history of life

Precambrian stromatolites in the Siyeh Formation, Glacier National Park. In 2002, a paper in the scientific journal Nature suggested that these 3.5 Gya (billion years old) geological formations contain fossilized cyanobacteria microbes. This suggests they are evidence of one of the earliest known life forms on Earth.
The last universal common ancestor (LUCA) is the most recent organism from which all organisms now living on Earth descend.[33] Thus, it is the most recent common ancestor of all current life on Earth. The LUCA is estimated to have lived some 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago (sometime in the Paleoarchean era).[34][35] The earliest evidence for life on Earth is graphite found to be biogenic in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland and microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia.[36][37] Although more than 99 percent of all species that ever lived on the planet are estimated to be extinct,[10][11] it is likely that more than a billion species of life exist on Earth currently, with the highest estimates and projections reaching one trillion species.[7]

There is strong evidence from genetics that all organisms have a common ancestor. In particular, every living cell makes use of nucleic acids as its genetic material, and uses the same twenty amino acids as the building blocks for proteins. All organisms use the same genetic code (with some extremely rare and minor deviations) to translate nucleic acid sequences into proteins. The universality of these traits strongly suggests common ancestry, because the selection of many of these traits seems arbitrary. Horizontal gene transfer makes it more difficult to study the last universal ancestor.[38] However, the universal use of the same genetic code, same nucleotides, and same amino acids makes the existence of such an ancestor overwhelmingly likely.[33] The first organisms were possibly anaerobic and thermophilic chemolithoautotrophs that evolved within inorganic compartments at geothermal environments.[39][40]

The most commonly accepted location of the root of the tree of life is between a monophyletic domain Bacteria and a clade formed by Archaea and Eukaryota of what is referred to as the "traditional tree of life" based on several molecular studies.[41] In 2016, William F. Martin genetically analyzed 6.1 million protein-coding genes from sequenced prokaryotic genomes of various phylogenetic trees and identified 355 protein clusters from amongst 286,514 protein clusters that were probably common to the LUCA. The results "depict LUCA as anaerobic, CO2-fixing, H2-dependent with a Wood–Ljungdahl pathway (the reductive acetyl-coenzyme A pathway), N2-fixing and thermophilic. LUCA's biochemistry was replete with FeS clusters and radical reaction mechanisms. Its cofactors reveal dependence upon transition metals, flavins, S-adenosyl methionine, coenzyme A, ferredoxin, molybdopterin, corrins and selenium. Its genetic code required nucleoside modifications and S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylations." This depicts methanogenic clostria as a basal clade in the 355 lineages examined, and suggest that the LUCA inhabited an anaerobic hydrothermal vent setting in a geochemically active environment rich in H2, CO2, and iron.[12] However, the presence of these genes in LUCA could also represent later horizontal gene transfers between archaea and bacteria.[42]

Reproduction
Main article: Reproduction
Sexual reproduction is widespread among current eukaryotes, and was likely present in the last common ancestor.[43] This is suggested by the finding of a core set of genes for meiosis in the descendants of lineages that diverged early from the eukaryotic evolutionary tree.[44] and Malik et al.[45] It is further supported by evidence that eukaryotes previously regarded as "ancient asexuals", such as Amoeba, were likely sexual in the past, and that most present day asexual amoeboid lineages likely arose recently and independently.[46]

In prokaryotes, natural bacterial transformation involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another and integration of the donor DNA into the recipient chromosome by recombination. Natural bacterial transformation is considered to be a primitive sexual process and occurs in both bacteria and archaea, although it has been studied mainly in bacteria. Transformation is clearly a bacterial adaptation and not an accidental occurrence, because it depends on numerous gene products that specifically interact with each other to enter a state of natural competence to perform this complex process.[47] Transformation is a common mode of DNA transfer among prokaryotes.[48]

Human intervention
Modern biotechnology is challenging traditional concepts of organisms and species. Cloning is the process of creating a new multicellular organism, genetically identical to another, with the potential of creating entirely new species of organisms. Cloning is the subject of much ethical debate.

In 2008, the J. Craig Venter Institute assembled a synthetic bacterial genome, Mycoplasma genitalium, by using recombination in yeast of 25 overlapping DNA fragments in a single step. The use of yeast recombination greatly simplifies the assembly of large DNA molecules from both synthetic and natural fragments.[49] Other companies, such as Synthetic Genomics, have already been formed to take advantage of the many commercial uses of custom designed genomes.

A planet is a large, rounded astronomical body that is neither a star nor its remnant. The best available theory of planet formation is the nebular hypothesis, which posits that an interstellar cloud collapses out of a nebula to create a young protostar orbited by a protoplanetary disk. Planets grow in this disk by the gradual accumulation of material driven by gravity, a process called accretion. The Solar System has at least eight planets: the terrestrial planets Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, and the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. These planets each rotate around an axis tilted with respect to its orbital pole. All planets of the Solar System other than Mercury possess a considerable atmosphere, and some share such features as ice caps, seasons, volcanism, hurricanes, tectonics, and even hydrology. Apart from Venus and Mars, the Solar System planets generate magnetic fields, and all except Venus and Mercury have natural satellites. The giant planets bear planetary rings, the most prominent being those of Saturn.

The word planet probably comes from the Greek planḗtai, meaning "wanderers". In antiquity, this word referred to the Sun, Moon, and five points of light visible by the naked eye that moved across the background of the stars—namely, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Planets have historically had religious associations: multiple cultures identified celestial bodies with gods, and these connections with mythology and folklore persist in the schemes for naming newly discovered Solar System bodies. Earth itself was recognized as a planet when heliocentrism supplanted geocentrism during the 16th and 17th centuries.

With the development of the telescope, the meaning of planet broadened to include objects only visible with assistance: the moons of the planets beyond Earth; the ice giants Uranus and Neptune; Ceres and other bodies later recognized to be part of the asteroid belt; and Pluto, later found to be the largest member of the collection of icy bodies known as the Kuiper belt. The discovery of other large objects in the Kuiper belt, particularly Eris, spurred debate about how exactly to define a planet. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) adopted a standard by which the four terrestrials and four giants qualify, placing Ceres, Pluto and Eris in the category of dwarf planet,[1][2][3] although many planetary scientists have continued to apply the term planet more broadly.[4]

Further advances in astronomy led to the discovery of over five thousand planets outside the Solar System, termed exoplanets. These include hot Jupiters—giant planets that orbit close to their parent stars—like 51 Pegasi b, super-Earths like Gliese 581c that have masses in between that of Earth and Neptune; and planets smaller than Earth, like Kepler-20e. Multiple exoplanets have been found to orbit in the habitable zones of their stars, but Earth remains the only planet known to support life.

History
Further information: History of astronomy and Timeline of Solar System astronomy

1660 illustration of Claudius Ptolemy's geocentric model
The idea of planets has evolved over its history, from the divine lights of antiquity to the earthly objects of the scientific age. The concept has expanded to include worlds not only in the Solar System, but in multitudes of other extrasolar systems. The consensus definition as to what counts as a planet vs. other objects orbiting the Sun has changed several times, previously encompassing asteroids, moons, and dwarf planets like Pluto,[5][6][7] and there continues to be some disagreement today.[7]

The five classical planets of the Solar System, being visible to the naked eye, have been known since ancient times and have had a significant impact on mythology, religious cosmology, and ancient astronomy. In ancient times, astronomers noted how certain lights moved across the sky, as opposed to the "fixed stars", which maintained a constant relative position in the sky.[8] Ancient Greeks called these lights πλάνητες ἀστέρες (planētes asteres, "wandering stars") or simply πλανῆται (planētai, "wanderers"),[9] from which today's word "planet" was derived.[10][11][12] In ancient Greece, China, Babylon, and indeed all pre-modern civilizations,[13][14] it was almost universally believed that Earth was the center of the Universe and that all the "planets" circled Earth. The reasons for this perception were that stars and planets appeared to revolve around Earth each day[15] and the apparently common-sense perceptions that Earth was solid and stable and that it was not moving but at rest.[16]

Babylon
Main article: Babylonian astronomy
The first civilization known to have a functional theory of the planets were the Babylonians, who lived in Mesopotamia in the first and second millennia BC. The oldest surviving planetary astronomical text is the Babylonian Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa, a 7th-century BC copy of a list of observations of the motions of the planet Venus, that probably dates as early as the second millennium BC.[17] The MUL.APIN is a pair of cuneiform tablets dating from the 7th century BC that lays out the motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets over the course of the year.[18] Late Babylonian astronomy is the origin of Western astronomy and indeed all Western efforts in the exact sciences.[19] The Enuma anu enlil, written during the Neo-Assyrian period in the 7th century BC,[20] comprises a list of omens and their relationships with various celestial phenomena including the motions of the planets.[21][22] Venus, Mercury, and the outer planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn were all identified by Babylonian astronomers. These would remain the only known planets until the invention of the telescope in early modern times.[23]

Greco-Roman astronomy
See also: Greek astronomy
The ancient Greeks initially did not attach as much significance to the planets as the Babylonians. In the 6th and 5th centuries BC, the Pythagoreans appear to have developed their own independent planetary theory, which consisted of the Earth, Sun, Moon, and planets revolving around a "Central Fire" at the center of the Universe. Pythagoras or Parmenides is said to have been the first to identify the evening star (Hesperos) and morning star (Phosphoros) as one and the same (Aphrodite, Greek corresponding to Latin Venus),[24] though this had long been known in Mesopotamia.[25][26] In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos proposed a heliocentric system, according to which Earth and the planets revolved around the Sun. The geocentric system remained dominant until the Scientific Revolution.[16]

By the 1st century BC, during the Hellenistic period, the Greeks had begun to develop their own mathematical schemes for predicting the positions of the planets. These schemes, which were based on geometry rather than the arithmetic of the Babylonians, would eventually eclipse the Babylonians' theories in complexity and comprehensiveness, and account for most of the astronomical movements observed from Earth with the naked eye. These theories would reach their fullest expression in the Almagest written by Ptolemy in the 2nd century CE. So complete was the domination of Ptolemy's model that it superseded all previous works on astronomy and remained the definitive astronomical text in the Western world for 13 centuries.[17][27] To the Greeks and Romans there were seven known planets, each presumed to be circling Earth according to the complex laws laid out by Ptolemy. They were, in increasing order from Earth (in Ptolemy's order and using modern names): the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.[12][27][28]

Medieval astronomy
Main articles: Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world and Indian astronomy
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, astronomy developed further in India and the medieval Islamic world. In 499 CE, the Indian astronomer Aryabhata propounded a planetary model that explicitly incorporated Earth's rotation about its axis, which he explains as the cause of what appears to be an apparent westward motion of the stars. He also theorised that the orbits of planets were elliptical.[29] Aryabhata's followers were particularly strong in South India, where his principles of the diurnal rotation of Earth, among others, were followed and a number of secondary works were based on them.[30]

The astronomy of the Islamic Golden Age mostly took place in the Middle East, Central Asia, Al-Andalus, and North Africa, and later in the Far East and India. These astronomers, like the polymath Ibn al-Haytham, generally accepted geocentrism, although they did dispute Ptolemy's system of epicycles and sought alternatives. The 10th-century astronomer Abu Sa'id al-Sijzi accepted that the Earth rotates around its axis.[31] In the 11th century, the transit of Venus was observed by Avicenna.[32] His contemporary Al-Biruni devised a method of determining the Earth's radius using trigonometry that, unlike the older method of Eratosthenes, only required observations at a single mountain.[33]

Scientific Revolution and new planets
See also: Heliocentrism
With the advent of the Scientific Revolution and the heliocentric model of Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler, use of the term "planet" changed from something that moved around the sky relative to the fixed star to a body that orbited the Sun, directly (a primary planet) or indirectly (a secondary or satellite planet). Thus the Earth was added to the roster of planets[34] and the Sun was removed. The Copernican count of primary planets stood until 1781, when William Herschel discovered Uranus.[35]

When four satellites of Jupiter (the Galilean moons) and five of Saturn were discovered in the 17th century, they were thought of as "satellite planets" or "secondary planets" orbiting the primary planets, though in the following decades they would come to be called simply "satellites" for short. Scientists generally considered planetary satellites to also be planets until about the 1920s, although this usage was not common among non-scientists.[7]

In the first decade of the 19th century, four new planets were discovered: Ceres (in 1801), Pallas (in 1802), Juno (in 1804), and Vesta (in 1807). It soon became apparent that they were rather different from previously known planets: they shared the same general region of space, between Mars and Jupiter (the asteroid belt), with sometimes overlapping orbits. This was an area where only one planet had been expected, and they were much much smaller than all other planets; indeed, it was suspected that they might be shards of a larger planet that had broken up. Herschel called them asteroids (from the Greek for "starlike") because even in the largest telescopes they resembled stars, without a resolvable disk.[6][36]

The situation was stable for four decades, but in the mid-1840s several additional asteroids were discovered (Astraea in 1845, Hebe and Iris in 1847, Flora and Metis in 1848, and Hygiea in 1849). New "planets" were discovered every year; as a result, astronomers began tabulating the asteroids (minor planets) separately from the major planets, and assigning them numbers instead of abstract planetary symbols,[6] although they continued to be considered as small planets.[37]

Neptune was discovered in 1846, its position having been predicted thanks to its gravitational influence upon Uranus. Because the orbit of Mercury appeared to be affected in a similar way, it was believed in the late 19th century that there might be another planet even closer to the Sun. However, the discrepancy between Mercury's orbit and the predictions of Newtonian gravity was instead explained by an improved theory of gravity, Einstein's general relativity.[38][39]

20th century
Pluto was discovered in 1930. After initial observations led to the belief that it was larger than Earth,[40] the object was immediately accepted as the ninth major planet. Further monitoring found the body was actually much smaller: in 1936, Ray Lyttleton suggested that Pluto may be an escaped satellite of Neptune,[41] and Fred Whipple suggested in 1964 that Pluto may be a comet.[42] The discovery of its large moon Charon in 1978 showed that Pluto was only 0.2% the mass of Earth.[43] As this was still substantially more massive than any known asteroid, and because no other trans-Neptunian objects had been discovered at that time, Pluto kept its planetary status, only officially losing it in 2006.[44][45]

In the 1950s, Gerard Kuiper published papers on the origin of the asteroids. He recognised that asteroids were typically not spherical, as had previously been thought, and that the asteroid families were remnants of collisions. Thus he differentiated between the largest asteroids as "true planets" versus the smaller ones as collisional fragments. From the 1960s onwards, the term "minor planet" was mostly displaced by the term "asteroid", and references to the asteroids as planets in the literature became scarce, except for the geologically evolved largest three: Ceres, and less often Pallas and Vesta.[37]

The beginning of Solar System exploration by space probes in the 1960s spurred a renewed interest in planetary science. A split in definitions regarding satellites occurred around then: planetary scientists began to reconsider the large moons as also being planets, but astronomers who were not planetary scientists generally did not.[7]

In 1992, astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the discovery of planets around a pulsar, PSR B1257+12.[46] This discovery is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of a planetary system around another star. Then, on 6 October 1995, Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the Geneva Observatory announced the first definitive detection of an exoplanet orbiting an ordinary main-sequence star (51 Pegasi).[47]

The discovery of extrasolar planets led to another ambiguity in defining a planet: the point at which a planet becomes a star. Many known extrasolar planets are many times the mass of Jupiter, approaching that of stellar objects known as brown dwarfs. Brown dwarfs are generally considered stars due to their theoretical ability to fuse deuterium, a heavier isotope of hydrogen. Although objects more massive than 75 times that of Jupiter fuse simple hydrogen, objects of 13 Jupiter masses can fuse deuterium. Deuterium is quite rare, constituting less than 0.0026% of the hydrogen in the galaxy, and most brown dwarfs would have ceased fusing deuterium long before their discovery, making them effectively indistinguishable from supermassive planets.[48]

21st century
With the discovery during the latter half of the 20th century of more objects within the Solar System and large objects around other stars, disputes arose over what should constitute a planet. There were particular disagreements over whether an object should be considered a planet if it was part of a distinct population such as a belt, or if it was large enough to generate energy by the thermonuclear fusion of deuterium.[49] Complicating the matter even further, bodies too small to generate energy by fusing deuterium can form by gas-cloud collapse just like stars and brown dwarfs, even down to the mass of Jupiter:[50] there was thus disagreement about whether how a body formed should be taken into account.[49]

A growing number of astronomers argued for Pluto to be declassified as a planet, because many similar objects approaching its size had been found in the same region of the Solar System (the Kuiper belt) during the 1990s and early 2000s. Pluto was found to be just one small body in a population of thousands.[49] They often referred to the demotion of the asteroids as a precedent, although that had been done based on their geophysical differences from planets rather than their being in a belt.[7] Some of the larger trans-Neptunian objects, such as Quaoar, Sedna, Eris, and Haumea,[51] were heralded in the popular press as the tenth planet. The announcement of Eris in 2005, an object 27% more massive than Pluto, created the impetus for an official definition of a planet,[49] as considering Pluto a planet would logically have demanded that Eris be considered a planet as well. Since different procedures were in place for naming planets versus non-planets, this created an urgent situation because under the rules Eris could not be named without defining what a planet was.[7] At the time, it was also thought that the size required for a trans-Neptunian object to become round was about the same as that required for the moons of the giant planets (about 400 km diameter), a figure that would have suggested about 200 round objects in the Kuiper belt and thousands more beyond.[52][53] Many astronomers argued that the public would not accept a definition creating a large number of planets.[7]

To acknowledge the problem, the IAU set about creating the definition of planet, and produced one in August 2006. Their definition dropped to the eight significantly larger bodies that had cleared their orbit (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune), and a new class of dwarf planets was created, initially containing three objects (Ceres, Pluto and Eris).[54]

This definition has not been universally used or accepted. In planetary geology celestial objects have been assessed and defined as planets by geophysical characteristics. Planetary scientists are more interested in planetary geology than dynamics, so they classify planets based on their geological properties. A celestial body may acquire a dynamic (planetary) geology at approximately the mass required for its mantle to become plastic under its own weight. This leads to a state of hydrostatic equilibrium where the body acquires a stable, round shape, which is adopted as the hallmark of planethood by geophysical definitions. For example:[55]

a substellar-mass body that has never undergone nuclear fusion and has enough gravitation to be round due to hydrostatic equilibrium, regardless of its orbital parameters.[56]
In the Solar System, this mass is generally less than the mass required for a body to clear its orbit, and thus some objects that are considered "planets" under geophysical definitions are not considered as such under the IAU definition, such as Ceres and Pluto.[3] Proponents of such definitions often argue that location should not matter and that planethood should be defined by the intrinsic properties of an object.[3] Dwarf planets had been proposed as a category of small planet (as opposed to planetoids as sub-planetary objects) and planetary geologists continue to treat them as planets despite the IAU definition.[57]


The largest known trans-Neptunian objects with their moons; the Earth and Moon have been added for comparison. All pictures are artist's impressions except for the Pluto and Earth systems.
The number of dwarf planets even among known objects is not certain. In 2019, Grundy et al. argued based on the low densities of some mid-sized trans-Neptunian objects that the limiting size required for a trans-Neptunian object to reach equilibrium was in fact much larger than it is for the icy moons of the giant planets, being about 900 km diameter.[57] There is general consensus on Ceres in the asteroid belt[58] and on the eight trans-Neptunians that probably cross this threshold: Quaoar, Sedna, Orcus, Pluto, Haumea, Eris, Makemake, and Gonggong.[59] Planetary geologists may include the nineteen known planetary-mass moons as "satellite planets", including Earth's Moon and Pluto's Charon, like the early modern astronomers.[3][60] Some go even further and include as planets relatively large, geologically evolved bodies that are nonetheless not very round today, such as Pallas and Vesta,[3] or rounded bodies that were completely disrupted by impacts and re-accreted like Hygiea.[61][62][63]

The 2006 IAU definition presents some challenges for exoplanets because the language is specific to the Solar System and the criteria of roundness and orbital zone clearance are not presently observable for exoplanets.[64] There is no official definition of exoplanets, but the IAU's working group on the topic adopted a provisional statement in 2018.

Astronomer Jean-Luc Margot proposed a mathematical criterion that determines whether an object can clear its orbit during the lifetime of its host star, based on the mass of the planet, its semimajor axis, and the mass of its host star.[65] The formula produces a value called π that is greater than 1 for planets.[a] The eight known planets and all known exoplanets have π values above 100, while Ceres, Pluto, and Eris have π values of 0.1, or less. Objects with π values of 1 or more are expected to be approximately spherical, so that objects that fulfill the orbital-zone clearance requirement around Sun-like stars will also fulfill the roundness requirement.[66]

Definition and similar concepts
Main articles: Definition of planet and IAU definition of planet

Euler diagram showing the IAU Executive Committee conception of the types of bodies in the Solar System
At the 2006 meeting of the IAU's General Assembly, after much debate and one failed proposal, the following definition was passed in a resolution voted for by a large majority of those remaining at the meeting, addressing particularly the issue of the lower limits for a celestial object to be defined as a planet. The 2006 resolution defines planets within the Solar System as follows:[1]

A "planet" [1] is a celestial body inside the Solar System that (a) is in orbit around the Sun, (b) has sufficient mass for its self-gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round) shape, and (c) has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit.

[1] The eight planets are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Under this definition, the Solar System is considered to have eight planets. Bodies that fulfill the first two conditions but not the third are classified as dwarf planets, provided they are not natural satellites of other planets. Originally an IAU committee had proposed a definition that would have included a larger number of planets as it did not include (c) as a criterion.[67] After much discussion, it was decided via a vote that those bodies should instead be classified as dwarf planets.[45]

This definition is based in modern theories of planetary formation, in which planetary embryos initially clear their orbital neighborhood of other smaller objects. As described below, planets form by material accreting together in a disk of matter surrounding a protostar. This process results in a collection of relatively substantial objects, each of which has either "swept up" or scattered away most of the material that had been orbiting near it. These objects do not collide with one another because they are too far apart, sometimes in orbital resonance.[68]

Exoplanet
Main article: Exoplanet § Definition
The 2006 IAU definition presents some challenges for exoplanets because the language is specific to the Solar System and the criteria of roundness and orbital zone clearance are not presently observable for exoplanets.[64] The IAU working group on extrasolar planets (WGESP) issued a working definition in 2001 and amended it in 2003.[69] In 2018, this definition was reassessed and updated as knowledge of exoplanets increased.[69] The current official working definition of an exoplanet is as follows:[70]

Objects with true masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium (currently calculated to be 13 Jupiter masses for objects of solar metallicity) that orbit stars, brown dwarfs or stellar remnants and that have a mass ratio with the central object below the L4/L5 instability (M/Mcentral < 2/(25+√621) are "planets" (no matter how they formed). The minimum mass/size required for an extrasolar object to be considered a planet should be the same as that used in our Solar System.
Substellar objects with true masses above the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are "brown dwarfs", no matter how they formed nor where they are located.
Free-floating objects in young star clusters with masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are not "planets", but are "sub-brown dwarfs" (or whatever name is most appropriate).[70]
The IAU noted that this definition could be expected to evolve as knowledge improves.[70] A 2022 review article discussing the history and rationale of this definition suggested that the words "in young star clusters" should be deleted in clause 3, as such objects have now been found elsewhere, and that the term "sub-brown dwarfs" should be replaced by the more current "free-floating planetary mass objects".[69]

Planetary-mass object
Main article: Planetary-mass object
See also: List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System

The planetary-mass moons to scale, compared with Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, and Pluto. Borderline Proteus and Nereid (about the same size as round Mimas) have been included. Unimaged Dysnomia (intermediate in size between Tethys and Enceladus) is not shown; it is in any case probably not a solid body.[71]
Geoscientists often reject the IAU definition, preferring to consider round moons and dwarf planets as also being planets. Some scientists who accept the IAU definition of "planet" use other terms for bodies satisfying geophysical planet definitions, such as "world".[7] The term "planetary mass object" has also been used to refer to ambiguous situations concerning exoplanets, such as objects with mass typical for a planet that are free-floating or orbit a brown dwarf instead of a star.[69]

Mythology and naming
See also: Weekday names and classical planet
The naming of planets differs between planets of the Solar System and exoplanets (planets of other planetary systems). Extrasolar planets are commonly named after their parent star and their order of discovery within its planetary system, such as Proxima Centauri b.

The names for the planets of the Solar System (other than Earth) in the English language are derived from naming practices developed consecutively by the Babylonians, Greeks and Romans of antiquity. The practice of grafting the names of gods onto the planets was almost certainly borrowed from the Babylonians by the ancient Greeks, and thereafter from the Greeks by the Romans. The Babylonians named Venus after the Sumerian goddess of love with the Akkadian name Ishtar; Mars after their god of war, Nergal; Mercury after their god of wisdom Nabu; and Jupiter after their chief god, Marduk.[72] There are too many concordances between Greek and Babylonian naming conventions for them to have arisen separately.[17] Given the differences in mythology, the correspondence was not perfect. For instance, the Babylonian Nergal was a god of war, and thus the Greeks identified him with Ares. Unlike Ares, Nergal was also a god of pestilence and ruler of the underworld.[73][74][75]

In ancient Greece, the two great luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, were called Helios and Selene, two ancient Titanic deities; the slowest planet, Saturn, was called Phainon, the shiner; followed by Phaethon, Jupiter, "bright"; the red planet, Mars was known as Pyroeis, the "fiery"; the brightest, Venus, was known as Phosphoros, the light bringer; and the fleeting final planet, Mercury, was called Stilbon, the gleamer. The Greeks assigned each planet to one among their pantheon of gods, the Olympians and the earlier Titans:[17]

Helios and Selene were the names of both planets and gods, both of them Titans (later supplanted by Olympians Apollo and Artemis);
Phainon was sacred to Cronus, the Titan who fathered the Olympians;
Phaethon was sacred to Zeus, Cronus's son who deposed him as king;
Pyroeis was given to Ares, son of Zeus and god of war;
Phosphoros was ruled by Aphrodite, the goddess of love; and
Stilbon with its speedy motion, was ruled over by Hermes, messenger of the gods and god of learning and wit.[17]

The Greek gods of Olympus, after whom the Solar System's Roman names of the planets are derived
Although modern Greeks still use their ancient names for the planets, other European languages, because of the influence of the Roman Empire and, later, the Catholic Church, use the Roman (Latin) names rather than the Greek ones. The Romans inherited Proto-Indo-European mythology as the Greeks did and shared with them a common pantheon under different names, but the Romans lacked the rich narrative traditions that Greek poetic culture had given their gods. During the later period of the Roman Republic, Roman writers borrowed much of the Greek narratives and applied them to their own pantheon, to the point where they became virtually indistinguishable.[76] When the Romans studied Greek astronomy, they gave the planets their own gods' names: Mercurius (for Hermes), Venus (Aphrodite), Mars (Ares), Iuppiter (Zeus) and Saturnus (Cronus). Some Romans, following a belief possibly originating in Mesopotamia but developed in Hellenistic Egypt, believed that the seven gods after whom the planets were named took hourly shifts in looking after affairs on Earth. The order of shifts went Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon (from the farthest to the closest planet).[77] Therefore, the first day was started by Saturn (1st hour), second day by Sun (25th hour), followed by Moon (49th hour), Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus. Because each day was named by the god that started it, this became the order of the days of the week in the Roman calendar.[78] In English, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday are straightforward translations of these Roman names. The other days were renamed after Tīw (Tuesday), Wōden (Wednesday), Þunor (Thursday), and Frīġ (Friday), the Anglo-Saxon gods considered similar or equivalent to Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus, respectively.[79]

Earth's name in English is not derived from Greco-Roman mythology. Because it was only generally accepted as a planet in the 17th century,[34] there is no tradition of naming it after a god. (The same is true, in English at least, of the Sun and the Moon, though they are no longer generally considered planets.) The name originates from the Old English word eorþe, which was the word for "ground" and "dirt" as well as the world itself.[80] As with its equivalents in the other Germanic languages, it derives ultimately from the Proto-Germanic word erþō, as can be seen in the English earth, the German Erde, the Dutch aarde, and the Scandinavian jord. Many of the Romance languages retain the old Roman word terra (or some variation of it) that was used with the meaning of "dry land" as opposed to "sea".[81] The non-Romance languages use their own native words. The Greeks retain their original name, Γή (Ge).[82]

Non-European cultures use other planetary-naming systems. India uses a system based on the Navagraha, which incorporates the seven traditional planets and the ascending and descending lunar nodes Rahu and Ketu. The planets are Surya 'Sun', Chandra 'Moon', Budha for Mercury, Shukra ('bright') for Venus, Mangala (the god of war) for Mars, Bṛhaspati (councilor of the gods) for Jupiter, and Shani (symbolic of time) for Saturn.[83]

The native Persian names of most of the planets are based on identifications of the Mesopotamian gods with Iranian gods, analogous to the Greek and Latin names. Mercury is Tir (تیر) for the western Iranian god Tīriya (patron of scribes), analogous to Nabu; Venus is Nāhid (ناهید) for Anahita; Mars is Bahrām (بهرام) for Verethragna; and Jupiter is Hormoz (هرمز) for Ahura Mazda. The Persian name for Saturn, Keyvān (کیوان), is a borrowing from Akkadian kajamānu, meaning "the permanent, steady".[84]

China and the countries of eastern Asia historically subject to Chinese cultural influence (such as Japan, Korea and Vietnam) use a naming system based on the five Chinese elements: water (Mercury 水星 "water star"), metal (Venus 金星 "metal star"), fire (Mars 火星 "fire star"), wood (Jupiter 木星 "wood star") and earth (Saturn 土星 "earth star").[78] The names of Uranus (天王星 "sky king star"), Neptune (海王星 "sea king star"), and Pluto (冥王星 "underworld king star") in Chinese, Korean, and Japanese are calques based on the roles of those gods in Roman and Greek mythology.[85][86][b] In the 19th century, Alexander Wylie and Li Shanlan calqued the names of the first 117 asteroids into Chinese, and many of their names are still used today, e.g. Ceres (穀神星 "grain goddess star"), Pallas (智神星 "wisdom goddess star"), Juno (婚神星 "marriage goddess star"), Vesta (灶神星 "hearth goddess star"), and Hygiea (健神星 "health goddess star").[88] Such translations were extended to some later minor planets, including some of the dwarf planets discovered in the 21st century, e.g. Haumea (妊神星 "pregnancy goddess star", Makemake (鳥神星 "bird goddess star"), and Eris (鬩神星 "quarrel goddess star"). However, except for the better-known asteroids and dwarf planets, many of them are rare outside Chinese astronomical dictionaries.[85]

In traditional Hebrew astronomy, the seven traditional planets have (for the most part) descriptive names – the Sun is חמה Ḥammah or "the hot one", the Moon is לבנה Levanah or "the white one", Venus is כוכב נוגה Kokhav Nogah or "the bright planet", Mercury is כוכב Kokhav or "the planet" (given its lack of distinguishing features), Mars is מאדים Ma'adim or "the red one", and Saturn is שבתאי Shabbatai or "the resting one" (in reference to its slow movement compared to the other visible planets).[89] The odd one out is Jupiter, called צדק Tzedeq or "justice".[89] Hebrew names were chosen for Uranus (אורון Oron, "small light") and Neptune (רהב Rahab, a Biblical sea monster) in 2009;[90] prior to that the names "Uranus" and "Neptune" had simply been borrowed.[91] The etymologies for the Arabic names of the planets are less well understood. Mostly agreed among scholars are Venus الزهرة (az-Zuhara, "the bright one"[92]), Earth الأرض (al-ʾArḍ, from the same root as eretz), and Saturn زُحَل (Zuḥal, "withdrawer"[93]). Multiple suggested etymologies exist for Mercury عُطَارِد (ʿUṭārid), Mars اَلْمِرِّيخ (al-Mirrīkh), and Jupiter المشتري (al-Muštarī), but there is no agreement among scholars.[94][95][96][97]

When subsequent planets were discovered in the 18th and 19th centuries, Uranus was named for a Greek deity and Neptune for a Roman one (the counterpart of Poseidon). The asteroids were initially named from mythology as well – Ceres, Juno, and Vesta are major Roman goddesses, and Pallas is an epithet of the major Greek goddess Athena – but as more and more were discovered, they first started being named after more minor goddesses, and the mythological restriction was dropped starting from the twentieth asteroid Massalia in 1852.[98] Pluto was given a classical name, as it was considered a major planet when it was discovered. After more objects were discovered beyond Neptune, naming conventions depending on their orbits were put in place: those in the 2:3 resonance with Neptune (the plutinos) are given names from underworld myths, while others are given names from creation myths. Most of the trans-Neptunian dwarf planets are named after gods and goddesses from other cultures (e.g. Quaoar is named after a Tongva god), except for Orcus and Eris which continued the Roman and Greek scheme.[99][100]

The moons (including the planetary-mass ones) are generally given names with some association with their parent planet. The planetary-mass moons of Jupiter are named after four of Zeus' lovers (or other sexual partners); those of Saturn are named after Cronus' brothers and sisters, the Titans; those of Uranus are named after characters from Shakespeare and Pope (originally specifically from fairy mythology,[101] but that ended with the naming of Miranda). Neptune's planetary-mass moon Triton is named after the god's son; Pluto's planetary-mass moon Charon is named after the ferryman of the dead, who carries the souls of the newly deceased to the underworld (Pluto's domain).[102]

Symbols
Main article: Planetary symbol
Most common planetary symbols
Sun
☉	Mercury
☿	Venus
♀	Earth
🜨	Moon
☾	Mars
♂	Jupiter
♃	Saturn
♄	Uranus 
⛢ or ♅	Neptune
♆
The written symbols for Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn and possibly Mars have been traced to forms found in late Greek papyrus texts.[103] The symbols for Jupiter and Saturn are identified as monograms of the corresponding Greek names, and the symbol for Mercury is a stylized caduceus.[103]

According to Annie Scott Dill Maunder, antecedents of the planetary symbols were used in art to represent the gods associated with the classical planets. Bianchini's planisphere, discovered by Francesco Bianchini in the 18th century but produced in the 2nd century,[104] shows Greek personifications of planetary gods charged with early versions of the planetary symbols. Mercury has a caduceus; Venus has, attached to her necklace, a cord connected to another necklace; Mars, a spear; Jupiter, a staff; Saturn, a scythe; the Sun, a circlet with rays radiating from it; and the Moon, a headdress with a crescent attached.[105] The modern shapes with the cross-marks first appeared around the 16th century. According to Maunder, the addition of crosses appears to be "an attempt to give a savour of Christianity to the symbols of the old pagan gods."[105] Earth itself was not considered a classical planet; its symbol descends from a pre-heliocentric symbol for the four corners of the world.[106]

When further planets were discovered orbiting the Sun, symbols were invented for them. The most common astronomical symbol for Uranus, ⛢,[107] was invented by Johann Gottfried Köhler, and was intended to represent the newly discovered metal platinum.[108][109] An alternative symbol, ♅, was invented by Jérôme Lalande, and represents a globe with a H on top, for Uranus' discoverer Herschel.[110] Today, ⛢ is mostly used by astronomers and ♅ by astrologers, though it is possible to find each symbol in the other context.[107] The first few asteroids were similarly given abstract symbols, e.g. Ceres' sickle (⚳), Pallas' spear (⚴), Juno's sceptre (⚵), and Vesta's hearth (⚶), but as their number rose further and further, this practice stopped in favour of numbering them instead (Massalia, the first asteroid not named from mythology, is also the first asteroid that was not assigned a symbol by its discoverer).[6] Neptune's symbol (♆) represents the god's trident.[109] The astronomical symbol for Pluto is a P-L monogram (♇),[111] though it has become less common since the IAU definition reclassified Pluto.[112] Since Pluto's reclassification, NASA has used the traditional astrological symbol of Pluto (⯓), a planetary orb over Pluto's bident.[112]

Some rarer planetary symbols in Unicode
Earth
♁	Vesta
⚶	Juno
⚵	Ceres
⚳	Pallas
⚴	Hygiea
⯚	Orcus
🝿	Pluto 
♇ or ⯓	Haumea
🝻	Quaoar
🝾	Makemake
🝼	Gonggong
🝽	Eris
⯰	Sedna
⯲
The IAU discourages the use of planetary symbols in modern journal articles in favour of one-letter or (to disambiguate Mercury and Mars) two-letter abbreviations for the major planets. The symbols for the Sun and Earth are nonetheless common, as solar mass, Earth mass and similar units are common in astronomy.[113] Other planetary symbols today are mostly encountered in astrology. Astrologers have resurrected the old astronomical symbols for the first few asteroids, and continue to invent symbols for other objects.[112] Unicode includes some relatively standard astrological symbols for minor planets, including dwarf planets discovered in the 21st century, though astronomical use of any of them is rare. In particular, the Eris symbol is a traditional one from Discordianism, a religion worshipping the goddess Eris. The other dwarf-planet symbols are mostly initialisms (except Haumea) in the native scripts of the cultures they come from; they also represent something associated with the corresponding deity or culture, e.g. Orcus' gape, Makemake's face, or Gonggong's snake-tail.[112][114]

Formation
Main article: Nebular hypothesis
Artists' impressions

A protoplanetary disk

Asteroids colliding during planet formation
It is not known with certainty how planets are built. The prevailing theory is that they are formed during the collapse of a nebula into a thin disk of gas and dust. A protostar forms at the core, surrounded by a rotating protoplanetary disk. Through accretion (a process of sticky collision) dust particles in the disk steadily accumulate mass to form ever-larger bodies. Local concentrations of mass known as planetesimals form, and these accelerate the accretion process by drawing in additional material by their gravitational attraction. These concentrations become ever denser until they collapse inward under gravity to form protoplanets.[115] After a planet reaches a mass somewhat larger than Mars' mass, it begins to accumulate an extended atmosphere,[116] greatly increasing the capture rate of the planetesimals by means of atmospheric drag.[117][118] Depending on the accretion history of solids and gas, a giant planet, an ice giant, or a terrestrial planet may result.[119][120][121] It is thought that the regular satellites of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus formed in a similar way;[122][123] however, Triton was likely captured by Neptune,[124] and Earth's Moon[125] and Pluto's Charon might have formed in collisions.[126]

When the protostar has grown such that it ignites to form a star, the surviving disk is removed from the inside outward by photoevaporation, the solar wind, Poynting–Robertson drag and other effects.[127][128] Thereafter there still may be many protoplanets orbiting the star or each other, but over time many will collide, either to form a larger, combined protoplanet or release material for other protoplanets to absorb.[129] Those objects that have become massive enough will capture most matter in their orbital neighbourhoods to become planets. Protoplanets that have avoided collisions may become natural satellites of planets through a process of gravitational capture, or remain in belts of other objects to become either dwarf planets or small bodies.[130][131]



Supernova remnant ejecta producing planet-forming material
The energetic impacts of the smaller planetesimals (as well as radioactive decay) will heat up the growing planet, causing it to at least partially melt. The interior of the planet begins to differentiate by density, with higher density materials sinking toward the core.[132] Smaller terrestrial planets lose most of their atmospheres because of this accretion, but the lost gases can be replaced by outgassing from the mantle and from the subsequent impact of comets.[133] (Smaller planets will lose any atmosphere they gain through various escape mechanisms.[134])

With the discovery and observation of planetary systems around stars other than the Sun, it is becoming possible to elaborate, revise or even replace this account. The level of metallicity—an astronomical term describing the abundance of chemical elements with an atomic number greater than 2 (helium)—appears to determine the likelihood that a star will have planets.[135][136] Hence, a metal-rich population I star is more likely to have a substantial planetary system than a metal-poor, population II star.[137]

Solar System
Main article: Solar System

The Solar System, including the Sun, planets, dwarf planets, and the larger moons (except Iapetus). Distances between the bodies are not to scale.
According to the IAU definition, there are eight planets in the Solar System, which are (in increasing distance from the Sun):[1] Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Jupiter is the largest, at 318 Earth masses, whereas Mercury is the smallest, at 0.055 Earth masses.[138]

The planets of the Solar System can be divided into categories based on their composition. Terrestrials are similar to Earth, with bodies largely composed of rock and metal: Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Earth is the largest terrestrial planet.[139] Giant planets are significantly more massive than the terrestrials: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.[139] They differ from the terrestrial planets in composition. The gas giants, Jupiter and Saturn, are primarily composed of hydrogen and helium and are the most massive planets in the Solar System. Saturn is one third as massive as Jupiter, at 95 Earth masses.[140] The ice giants, Uranus and Neptune, are primarily composed of low-boiling-point materials such as water, methane, and ammonia, with thick atmospheres of hydrogen and helium. They have a significantly lower mass than the gas giants (only 14 and 17 Earth masses).[140]

Dwarf planets are gravitationally rounded, but have not cleared their orbits of other bodies. In increasing order of average distance from the Sun, the ones generally agreed among astronomers are Ceres, Orcus, Pluto, Haumea, Quaoar, Makemake, Gonggong, Eris and Sedna.[57] Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt, located between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The other eight all orbit beyond Neptune. Orcus, Pluto, Haumea, Quaoar, and Makemake orbit in the Kuiper belt, which is a second belt of small Solar System bodies beyond the orbit of Neptune. Gonggong and Eris orbit in the scattered disc, which is somewhat further out and, unlike the Kuiper belt, is unstable towards interactions with Neptune. Sedna is the largest known detached object, a population that never comes close enough to the Sun to interact with any of the classical planets; the origins of their orbits are still being debated. All nine are similar to terrestrial planets in having a solid surface, but they are made of ice and rock, rather than rock and metal. Moreover, all of them are smaller than Mercury, with Pluto being the largest known dwarf planet, and Eris being the most massive known.[141][142]

There are at least nineteen planetary-mass moons or satellite planets—moons large enough to take on ellipsoidal shapes:[3]

One satellite of Earth: the Moon
Four satellites of Jupiter: Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto
Seven satellites of Saturn: Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, Rhea, Titan, and Iapetus
Five satellites of Uranus: Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon
One satellite of Neptune: Triton
One satellite of Pluto: Charon
The Moon, Io, and Europa have compositions similar to the terrestrial planets; the others are made of ice and rock like the dwarf planets, with Tethys being made of almost pure ice. (Europa is often considered an icy planet, though, because its surface ice layer makes it difficult to study its interior.[3][143]) Ganymede and Titan are larger than Mercury by radius, and Callisto almost equals it, but all three are much less massive. Mimas is the smallest object generally agreed to be a geophysical planet, at about six millionths of Earth's mass, though there are many larger bodies that may not be geophysical planets (e.g. Salacia).[57]

Planetary attributes
The tables below summarise some properties of objects generally agreed to satisfy geophysical planet definitions. There are many smaller dwarf planet candidates, such as Salacia, that have not been included in the tables because astronomers disagree on whether or not they are dwarf planets. Likewise, objects such as Pallas and Vesta that developed planetary geology but are no longer round are also excluded, though some authors would include them regardless. The diameters, masses, orbital periods, and rotation periods of the major planets are available from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.[138] JPL also provides their semi-major axes, inclinations, and eccentricities of planetary orbits,[144] and the axial tilts are taken from their Horizons database.[145] Other information is summarized by NASA.[146] The data for the dwarf planets and planetary-mass moons is taken from list of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System, with sources listed there.

Name	Equatorial
diameter†	Mass†	Semi-major axis (AU)	Orbital period
(Julian years)	Inclination
to the ecliptic (°)	Orbital
eccentricity	Rotation period
(days)	Confirmed
moons	Axial tilt (°)	Rings	Atmosphere
Major planets
	Mercury	0.383	0.06	0.39	0.24	7.00	0.206	58.65	0	0.04	no	minimal
♀	Venus	0.949	0.81	0.72	0.62	3.39	0.007	243.02	0	177.30	no	CO2, N2
🜨	Earth‡	1.000	1.00	1.00	1.00	0.0	0.017	1.00	1	23.44	no	N2, O2, Ar
♂	Mars	0.532	0.11	1.52	1.88	1.85	0.093	1.03	2	25.19	no	CO2, N2, Ar
♃	Jupiter	11.209	317.83	5.20	11.86	1.30	0.048	0.41	95	3.13	yes	H2, He
♄	Saturn	9.449	95.16	9.54	29.45	2.49	0.054	0.44	146	26.73	yes	H2, He
⛢	Uranus	4.007	14.54	19.19	84.02	0.773	0.047	0.72	27	97.77	yes	H2, He, CH4
♆	Neptune	3.883	17.15	30.07	164.79	1.77	0.009	0.67	14	28.32	yes	H2, He, CH4
Dwarf planets
⚳	Ceres	0.0742	0.00016	2.77	4.60	10.59	0.080	0.38	0	4	no	minimal
🝿	Orcus	0.072	0.0001	39.42	247.5	20.59	0.226	9.54?	1	?	?	?
♇	Pluto	0.186	0.0022	39.48	247.9	17.14	0.249	6.39	5	119.6	no	N2, CH4, CO
🝻	Haumea	0.13	0.0007	43.34	283.8	28.21	0.195	0.16	2	126?	yes	?
🝾	Quaoar	0.085	0.0002	43.69	288.0	7.99	0.038	0.74	1	14?	yes	?
🝼	Makemake	0.11	0.0005	45.79	306.2	28.98	0.161	0.95	1	?	?	minimal
🝽	Gonggong	0.10	0.0003	67.33	552.5	30.74	0.506	0.93	1	?	?	?
⯰	Eris	0.18	0.0028	67.67	559	44.04	0.436	15.79	1	78?	?	?
⯲	Sedna	0.078	?	525.86	12059	11.93	0.855	0.43	0	?	?	?
Color legend:   terrestrial planets   gas giants   ice giants (both categories of giant planets)   dwarf planets
† Measured relative to Earth.
‡ The Earth's mass is approximately 5.972 × 1024 kilograms, and its equatorial radius is approximately 6,378 kilometres.[138]
As all the planetary-mass moons exhibit synchronous rotation, their rotation periods equal their orbital periods.

Planetary-mass moons
Name	Equatorial
diameter†	Mass†	Semi-major axis (km)	Orbital period
(days)	Inclination
to primary's equator (°)	Orbital
eccentricity	Axial tilt (°)	Atmosphere
☾	Moon	0.272	0.0123	384,399	27.322	18.29–28.58	0.0549	6.68	minimal
♃1	Io	0.285	0.0150	421,600	1.769	0.04	0.0041	≈0	minimal
♃2	Europa	0.246	0.00804	670,900	3.551	0.47	0.009	≈0.1	minimal
♃3	Ganymede	0.413	0.0248	1,070,400	7.155	1.85	0.0013	≈0.2	minimal
♃4	Callisto	0.378	0.0180	1,882,700	16.689	0.2	0.0074	≈0–2	minimal
♄1	Mimas	0.031	0.00000628	185,520	0.942	1.51	0.0202	≈0	
♄2	Enceladus	0.04	0.0000181	237,948	1.370	0.02	0.0047	≈0	minimal
♄3	Tethys	0.084	0.000103	294,619	1.888	1.51	0.02	≈0	
♄4	Dione	0.088	0.000183	377,396	2.737	0.019	0.002	≈0	minimal
♄5	Rhea	0.12	0.000386	527,108	4.518	0.345	0.001	≈0	minimal
♄6	Titan	0.404	0.0225	1,221,870	15.945	0.33	0.0288	≈0.3	N2, CH4
♄8	Iapetus	0.115	0.000302	3,560,820	79.322	14.72	0.0286	≈0	
⛢5	Miranda	0.037	0.0000110	129,390	1.414	4.22	0.0013	≈0	
⛢1	Ariel	0.091	0.000226	190,900	2.520	0.31	0.0012	≈0	
⛢2	Umbriel	0.092	0.00020	266,000	4.144	0.36	0.005	≈0	
⛢3	Titania	0.124	0.00059	436,300	8.706	0.14	0.0011	≈0	
⛢4	Oberon	0.119	0.000505	583,519	13.46	0.10	0.0014	≈0	
♆1	Triton	0.212	0.00358	354,759	5.877	157	0.00002	≈0.7	N2, CH4
♇1	Charon	0.095	0.000255	17,536	6.387	0.001	0.0022	≈0	
Color legend:   predominantly rocky   predominantly icy
† Measured relative to Earth.
Exoplanets
Main article: Exoplanet
Exoplanet detections per year
Exoplanet detections per year as of Augest 2023 (by NASA Exoplanet Archive)[147]
An exoplanet (extrasolar planet) is a planet outside the Solar System. As of 1 September 2023, there are 5,506 confirmed exoplanets in 4,065 planetary systems, with 878 systems having more than one planet.[148] Known exoplanets range in size from gas giants about twice as large as Jupiter down to just over the size of the Moon. Analysis of gravitational microlensing data suggests a minimum average of 1.6 bound planets for every star in the Milky Way.[149]

In early 1992, radio astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the discovery of two planets orbiting the pulsar PSR 1257+12.[46] This discovery was confirmed, and is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of exoplanets. Researchers suspect they formed from a disk remnant left over from the supernova that produced the pulsar.[150]

The first confirmed discovery of an extrasolar planet orbiting an ordinary main-sequence star occurred on 6 October 1995, when Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the University of Geneva announced the detection of 51 Pegasi b, an exoplanet around 51 Pegasi.[151] From then until the Kepler mission most known extrasolar planets were gas giants comparable in mass to Jupiter or larger as they were more easily detected. The catalog of Kepler candidate planets consists mostly of planets the size of Neptune and smaller, down to smaller than Mercury.[152][153]

In 2011, the Kepler Space Telescope team reported the discovery of the first Earth-sized extrasolar planets orbiting a Sun-like star, Kepler-20e and Kepler-20f.[154][155][156] Since that time, more than 100 planets have been identified that are approximately the same size as Earth, 20 of which orbit in the habitable zone of their star – the range of orbits where a terrestrial planet could sustain liquid water on its surface, given enough atmospheric pressure.[157][158][159] One in five Sun-like stars is thought to have an Earth-sized planet in its habitable zone, which suggests that the nearest would be expected to be within 12 light-years distance from Earth.[c] The frequency of occurrence of such terrestrial planets is one of the variables in the Drake equation, which estimates the number of intelligent, communicating civilizations that exist in the Milky Way.[162]

There are types of planets that do not exist in the Solar System: super-Earths and mini-Neptunes, which have masses between that of Earth and Neptune. Such planets could be rocky like Earth or a mixture of volatiles and gas like Neptune—the dividing line between the two possibilities is currently thought to occur at about twice the mass of Earth.[163] The planet Gliese 581c, with mass 5.5–10.4 times the mass of Earth,[164] attracted attention upon its discovery for potentially being in the habitable zone,[165] though later studies concluded that it is actually too close to its star to be habitable.[166] Exoplanets have been found that are much closer to their parent star than any planet in the Solar System is to the Sun. Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun at 0.4 AU, takes 88 days for an orbit, but ultra-short period planets can orbit in less than a day. The Kepler-11 system has five of its planets in shorter orbits than Mercury's, all of them much more massive than Mercury. There are hot Jupiters, such as 51 Pegasi b,[151] that orbit very close to their star and may evaporate to become chthonian planets, which are the leftover cores. There are also exoplanets that are much farther from their star. Neptune is 30 AU from the Sun and takes 165 years to orbit, but there are exoplanets that are thousands of AU from their star and take more than a million years to orbit. e.g. COCONUTS-2b.[167]

Attributes
Although each planet has unique physical characteristics, a number of broad commonalities do exist among them. Some of these characteristics, such as rings or natural satellites, have only as yet been observed in planets in the Solar System, whereas others are commonly observed in extrasolar planets.[168]

Dynamic characteristics
Orbit
Main articles: Orbit and orbital elements
See also: Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Exoplanetology § Orbital parameters

The orbit of the planet Neptune compared to that of Pluto. Note the elongation of Pluto's orbit in relation to Neptune's (eccentricity), as well as its large angle to the ecliptic (inclination).
In the Solar System, all the planets orbit the Sun in the same direction as the Sun rotates: counter-clockwise as seen from above the Sun's north pole. At least one extrasolar planet, WASP-17b, has been found to orbit in the opposite direction to its star's rotation.[169] The period of one revolution of a planet's orbit is known as its sidereal period or year.[170] A planet's year depends on its distance from its star; the farther a planet is from its star, the longer the distance it must travel and the slower its speed, since it is less affected by its star's gravity.

No planet's orbit is perfectly circular, and hence the distance of each from the host star varies over the course of its year. The closest approach to its star is called its periastron, or perihelion in the Solar System, whereas its farthest separation from the star is called its apastron (aphelion). As a planet approaches periastron, its speed increases as it trades gravitational potential energy for kinetic energy, just as a falling object on Earth accelerates as it falls. As the planet nears apastron, its speed decreases, just as an object thrown upwards on Earth slows down as it reaches the apex of its trajectory.[171]

Each planet's orbit is delineated by a set of elements:

The eccentricity of an orbit describes the elongation of a planet's elliptical (oval) orbit. Planets with low eccentricities have more circular orbits, whereas planets with high eccentricities have more elliptical orbits. The planets and large moons in the Solar System have relatively low eccentricities, and thus nearly circular orbits.[170] The comets and many Kuiper belt objects, as well as several extrasolar planets, have very high eccentricities, and thus exceedingly elliptical orbits.[172][173]
The semi-major axis gives the size of the orbit. It is the distance from the midpoint to the longest diameter of its elliptical orbit. This distance is not the same as its apastron, because no planet's orbit has its star at its exact centre.[170]
The inclination of a planet tells how far above or below an established reference plane its orbit is tilted. In the Solar System, the reference plane is the plane of Earth's orbit, called the ecliptic. For extrasolar planets, the plane, known as the sky plane or plane of the sky, is the plane perpendicular to the observer's line of sight from Earth.[174] The eight planets of the Solar System all lie very close to the ecliptic; comets and Kuiper belt objects like Pluto are at far more extreme angles to it.[175] The large moons are generally not very inclined to their parent planets' equators, but Earth's Moon, Saturn's Iapetus, and Neptune's Triton are exceptions. Triton is unique among the large moons in that it orbits retrograde, i.e. in the direction opposite to its parent planet's rotation.[176]
The points at which a planet crosses above and below its reference plane are called its ascending and descending nodes.[170] The longitude of the ascending node is the angle between the reference plane's 0 longitude and the planet's ascending node. The argument of periapsis (or perihelion in the Solar System) is the angle between a planet's ascending node and its closest approach to its star.[170]
Axial tilt
Main article: Axial tilt

Earth's axial tilt is about 23.4°. It oscillates between 22.1° and 24.5° on a 41,000-year cycle and is currently decreasing.
Planets have varying degrees of axial tilt; they spin at an angle to the plane of their stars' equators. This causes the amount of light received by each hemisphere to vary over the course of its year; when the northern hemisphere points away from its star, the southern hemisphere points towards it, and vice versa. Each planet therefore has seasons, resulting in changes to the climate over the course of its year. The time at which each hemisphere points farthest or nearest from its star is known as its solstice. Each planet has two in the course of its orbit; when one hemisphere has its summer solstice with its day being the longest, the other has its winter solstice when its day is shortest. The varying amount of light and heat received by each hemisphere creates annual changes in weather patterns for each half of the planet. Jupiter's axial tilt is very small, so its seasonal variation is minimal; Uranus, on the other hand, has an axial tilt so extreme it is virtually on its side, which means that its hemispheres are either continually in sunlight or continually in darkness around the time of its solstices.[177] In the Solar System, Mercury, Venus, Ceres, and Jupiter have very small tilts; Pallas, Uranus, and Pluto have extreme ones; and Earth, Mars, Vesta, Saturn, and Neptune have moderate ones.[178][179][180][181] Among extrasolar planets, axial tilts are not known for certain, though most hot Jupiters are believed to have a negligible axial tilt as a result of their proximity to their stars.[182] Similarly, the axial tilts of the planetary-mass moons are near zero,[183] with Earth's Moon at 6.687° as the biggest exception;[184] additionally, Callisto's axial tilt varies between 0 and about 2 degrees on timescales of thousands of years.[185]

Rotation
See also: Exoplanetology § Rotation and axial tilt
The planets rotate around invisible axes through their centres. A planet's rotation period is known as a stellar day. Most of the planets in the Solar System rotate in the same direction as they orbit the Sun, which is counter-clockwise as seen from above the Sun's north pole. The exceptions are Venus[186] and Uranus,[187] which rotate clockwise, though Uranus's extreme axial tilt means there are differing conventions on which of its poles is "north", and therefore whether it is rotating clockwise or anti-clockwise.[188] Regardless of which convention is used, Uranus has a retrograde rotation relative to its orbit.[187]


Comparison of the rotation period (sped up 10 000 times, negative values denoting retrograde), flattening and axial tilt of the planets and the Moon (SVG animation)
The rotation of a planet can be induced by several factors during formation. A net angular momentum can be induced by the individual angular momentum contributions of accreted objects. The accretion of gas by the giant planets contributes to the angular momentum. Finally, during the last stages of planet building, a stochastic process of protoplanetary accretion can randomly alter the spin axis of the planet.[189] There is great variation in the length of day between the planets, with Venus taking 243 days to rotate, and the giant planets only a few hours.[146] The rotational periods of extrasolar planets are not known, but for hot Jupiters, their proximity to their stars means that they are tidally locked (that is, their orbits are in sync with their rotations). This means, they always show one face to their stars, with one side in perpetual day, the other in perpetual night.[190] Mercury and Venus, the closest planets to the Sun, similarly exhibit very slow rotation: Mercury is tidally locked into a 3:2 spin–orbit resonance (rotating three times for every two revolutions around the Sun),[191] and Venus' rotation may be in equilibrium between tidal forces slowing it down and atmospheric tides created by solar heating speeding it up.[192][193]

All the large moons are tidally locked to their parent planets;[194] Pluto and Charon are tidally locked to each other,[195] as are Eris and Dysnomia.[196] Orcus and its moon Vanth may be another example of mutual tidal locking, but the data is not conclusive.[197] The other dwarf planets with known rotation periods rotate faster than Earth; Haumea rotates so fast that it has been distorted into a triaxial ellipsoid.[198] The exoplanet Tau Boötis b and its parent star Tau Boötis appear to be mutually tidally locked.[199][200]

Orbital clearing
Main article: Clearing the neighbourhood
The defining dynamic characteristic of a planet, according to the IAU definition, is that it has cleared its neighborhood. A planet that has cleared its neighborhood has accumulated enough mass to gather up or sweep away all the planetesimals in its orbit. In effect, it orbits its star in isolation, as opposed to sharing its orbit with a multitude of similar-sized objects. As described above, this characteristic was mandated as part of the IAU's official definition of a planet in August 2006.[1] Although to date this criterion only applies to the Solar System, a number of young extrasolar systems have been found in which evidence suggests orbital clearing is taking place within their circumstellar discs.[201]

Physical characteristics
Size and shape
See also: Earth § Size and shape, Astronomical body § Size, and Planetary coordinate system
Gravity causes planets to be pulled into a roughly spherical shape, so a planet's size can be expressed roughly by an average radius (for example, Earth radius or Jupiter radius). However, planets are not perfectly spherical; for example, the Earth's rotation causes it to be slightly flattened at the poles with a bulge around the equator.[202] Therefore, a better approximation of Earth's shape is an oblate spheroid, whose equatorial diameter is 43 kilometers (27 mi) larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.[203] Generally, a planet's shape may be described by giving polar and equatorial radii of a spheroid or specifying a reference ellipsoid. From such a specification, the planet's flattening, surface area, and volume can be calculated; its normal gravity can be computed knowing its size, shape, rotation rate and mass.[204]

Mass
Main article: Planetary mass
A planet's defining physical characteristic is that it is massive enough for the force of its own gravity to dominate over the electromagnetic forces binding its physical structure, leading to a state of hydrostatic equilibrium. This effectively means that all planets are spherical or spheroidal. Up to a certain mass, an object can be irregular in shape, but beyond that point, which varies depending on the chemical makeup of the object, gravity begins to pull an object towards its own centre of mass until the object collapses into a sphere.[205]

Mass is the prime attribute by which planets are distinguished from stars. While the lower stellar mass limit is estimated to be around 75 times that of Jupiter (MJ), the upper planetary mass limit for planethood is only roughly 13 MJ for objects with solar-type isotopic abundance, beyond which it achieves conditions suitable for nuclear fusion of deuterium. Other than the Sun, no objects of such mass exist in the Solar System; but there are exoplanets of this size. The 13 MJ limit is not universally agreed upon and the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia includes objects up to 60 MJ,[206] and the Exoplanet Data Explorer up to 24 MJ.[207] The mass-radius relationship does not change appreciably with the onset of deuterium fusion, with radius remaining roughly constant as mass increases from one Saturn mass (beginning of significant self-compression) to about 0.08 M☉ (around 80 MJ, the onset of hydrogen burning and becoming a red dwarf), and thus some authors argue that brown dwarfs should be considered as high-mass Jovian planets.[163]

The smallest known exoplanet with an accurately known mass is PSR B1257+12A, one of the first extrasolar planets discovered, which was found in 1992 in orbit around a pulsar. Its mass is roughly half that of the planet Mercury.[208] Even smaller is WD 1145+017 b, orbiting a white dwarf; its mass is roughly that of the dwarf planet Haumea, and it is typically termed a minor planet.[209] The smallest known planet orbiting a main-sequence star other than the Sun is Kepler-37b, with a mass (and radius) that is probably slightly higher than that of the Moon.[153] The smallest object in the Solar System generally agreed to be a geophysical planet is Saturn's moon Mimas, with a radius about 3.1% of Earth's and a mass about 0.00063% of Earth's.[210] Saturn's smaller moon Phoebe, currently an irregular body of 1.7% Earth's radius[211] and 0.00014% Earth's mass,[210] is thought to have attained hydrostatic equilibrium and differentiation early in its history before being battered out of shape by impacts.[212] Some asteroids may be fragments of protoplanets that began to accrete and differentiate, but suffered catastrophic collisions, leaving only a metallic or rocky core today,[213][214][215] or a reaccumulation of the resulting debris.[63]

Internal differentiation
Main article: Planetary differentiation

Illustration of the interior of Jupiter, with a rocky core overlaid by a deep layer of metallic hydrogen
Every planet began its existence in an entirely fluid state; in early formation, the denser, heavier materials sank to the centre, leaving the lighter materials near the surface. Each therefore has a differentiated interior consisting of a dense planetary core surrounded by a mantle that either is or was a fluid. The terrestrial planets' mantles are sealed within hard crusts,[216] but in the giant planets the mantle simply blends into the upper cloud layers. The terrestrial planets have cores of elements such as iron and nickel, and mantles of silicates. Jupiter and Saturn are believed to have cores of rock and metal surrounded by mantles of metallic hydrogen.[217] Uranus and Neptune, which are smaller, have rocky cores surrounded by mantles of water, ammonia, methane and other ices.[218] The fluid action within these planets' cores creates a geodynamo that generates a magnetic field.[216] Similar differentiation processes are believed to have occurred on some of the large moons and dwarf planets,[57] though the process may not always have been completed: Ceres, Callisto, and Titan appear to be incompletely differentiated.[219][220] The asteroid Vesta, though not a dwarf planet because it was battered by impacts out of roundness, has a differentiated interior[221] similar to that of Venus, Earth, and Mars.[215]

Atmosphere
Main articles: Atmosphere and extraterrestrial atmospheres
See also: Extraterrestrial skies

Earth's atmosphere
All of the Solar System planets except Mercury[222] have substantial atmospheres because their gravity is strong enough to keep gases close to the surface. Saturn's largest moon Titan also has a substantial atmosphere thicker than that of Earth;[223] Neptune's largest moon Triton[224] and the dwarf planet Pluto have more tenuous atmospheres.[225] The larger giant planets are massive enough to keep large amounts of the light gases hydrogen and helium, whereas the smaller planets lose these gases into space.[226] Analysis of exoplanets suggests that the threshold for being able to hold on to these light gases occurs at about 2.0+0.7
−0.6 M🜨, so that Earth and Venus are near the maximum size for rocky planets.[163]

The composition of Earth's atmosphere is different from the other planets because the various life processes that have transpired on the planet have introduced free molecular oxygen.[227] The atmospheres of Mars and Venus are both dominated by carbon dioxide, but differ drastically in density: the average surface pressure of Mars' atmosphere is less than 1% that of Earth's (too low to allow liquid water to exist),[228] while the average surface pressure of Venus' atmosphere is about 92 times that of Earth's.[229] It is likely that Venus' atmosphere was the result of a runaway greenhouse effect in its history, which today makes it the hottest planet by surface temperature, hotter even than Mercury.[230] Despite hostile surface conditions, temperature and pressure at about 50–55 km altitude in Venus' atmosphere are close to Earthlike conditions (the only place in the Solar System beyond Earth where this is so) and this region has been suggested as a plausible base for future human exploration.[231] Titan has the only nitrogen-rich planetary atmosphere in the Solar System other than Earth's. Just as Earth's conditions are close to the triple point of water, allowing it to exist in all three states on the planet's surface, so Titan's are to the triple point of methane.[232]

Planetary atmospheres are affected by the varying insolation or internal energy, leading to the formation of dynamic weather systems such as hurricanes (on Earth), planet-wide dust storms (on Mars), a greater-than-Earth-sized anticyclone on Jupiter (called the Great Red Spot), and holes in the atmosphere (on Neptune).[177] Weather patterns detected on exoplanets include a hot region on HD 189733 b twice the size of the Great Red Spot,[233] as well as clouds on the hot Jupiter Kepler-7b,[234] the super-Earth Gliese 1214 b and others.[235][236]

Hot Jupiters, due to their extreme proximities to their host stars, have been shown to be losing their atmospheres into space due to stellar radiation, much like the tails of comets.[237][238] These planets may have vast differences in temperature between their day and night sides that produce supersonic winds,[239] although multiple factors are involved and the details of the atmospheric dynamics that affect the day-night temperature difference are complex.[240][241]

Magnetosphere
Main article: Magnetosphere

Earth's magnetosphere (diagram)
One important characteristic of the planets is their intrinsic magnetic moments, which in turn give rise to magnetospheres. The presence of a magnetic field indicates that the planet is still geologically alive. In other words, magnetized planets have flows of electrically conducting material in their interiors, which generate their magnetic fields. These fields significantly change the interaction of the planet and solar wind. A magnetized planet creates a cavity in the solar wind around itself called the magnetosphere, which the wind cannot penetrate. The magnetosphere can be much larger than the planet itself. In contrast, non-magnetized planets have only small magnetospheres induced by interaction of the ionosphere with the solar wind, which cannot effectively protect the planet.[242]

Of the eight planets in the Solar System, only Venus and Mars lack such a magnetic field.[242] Of the magnetized planets the magnetic field of Mercury is the weakest, and is barely able to deflect the solar wind. Jupiter's moon Ganymede has a magnetic field several times stronger, and Jupiter's is the strongest in the Solar System (so intense in fact that it poses a serious health risk to future crewed missions to all its moons inward of Callisto[243]). The magnetic fields of the other giant planets, measured at their surfaces, are roughly similar in strength to that of Earth, but their magnetic moments are significantly larger. The magnetic fields of Uranus and Neptune are strongly tilted relative to the planets' rotational axes and displaced from the planets' centres.[242]

In 2003, a team of astronomers in Hawaii observing the star HD 179949 detected a bright spot on its surface, apparently created by the magnetosphere of an orbiting hot Jupiter.[244][245]

Secondary characteristics
Main articles: Natural satellite and planetary ring

The rings of Saturn
Several planets or dwarf planets in the Solar System (such as Neptune and Pluto) have orbital periods that are in resonance with each other or with smaller bodies. This is common in satellite systems (e.g. the resonance between Io, Europa, and Ganymede around Jupiter, or between Enceladus and Dione around Saturn). All except Mercury and Venus have natural satellites, often called "moons". Earth has one, Mars has two, and the giant planets have numerous moons in complex planetary-type systems. Except for Ceres and Sedna, all the consensus dwarf planets are known to have at least one moon as well. Many moons of the giant planets have features similar to those on the terrestrial planets and dwarf planets, and some have been studied as possible abodes of life (especially Europa and Enceladus).[246][247][248][249][250]

The four giant planets are orbited by planetary rings of varying size and complexity. The rings are composed primarily of dust or particulate matter, but can host tiny 'moonlets' whose gravity shapes and maintains their structure. Although the origins of planetary rings is not precisely known, they are believed to be the result of natural satellites that fell below their parent planet's Roche limit and were torn apart by tidal forces.[251][252] The dwarf planets Haumea[253] and Quaoar also have rings.[254]

No secondary characteristics have been observed around extrasolar planets. The sub-brown dwarf Cha 110913-773444, which has been described as a rogue planet, is believed to be orbited by a tiny protoplanetary disc[255] and the sub-brown dwarf OTS 44 was shown to be surrounded by a substantial protoplanetary disk of at least 10 Earth masses.[256]
